PDF page 3
cancelled by complete 27 representatations of E6 which survive to low energies, even
though E6 is broken at the GUT scale.
We refer to the model described above as the exceptional supersymmetric standard
model (ESSM). The ESSM thus represents a low energy alternative to the MSSM or
NMSSM, and provides a solution to the µ problem without domain wall problems. The
ESSM contains a rich phenomenology accessible to the LHC in the form of a Z′ plus three
families of exotic quarks and non-Higgs doublets. In a companion paper we have made a
comprehensive study of the theory and phenomenology of the ESSM [7]. The purpose of
this accompanying letter is to summarize the phenomenological highlights of our study,
including the two loop upper bound on the lightest CP-even Higgs mass, and the LHC
phenomenology of the Z′ and exotic quarks (including some new phenomenological results)
in a form that will be more easily accessible to our phenomenological and experimental
colleagues. For more details we refer the interested reader to the accompanying full length
paper [7]. Previously, the implications of SUSY models with an additional U(1)N gauge
symmetry had been studied in the context of leptogenesis [8], EW baryogenesis [9] and
neutrino physics [10]. Supersymmetric models with a U(1)N gauge symmetry under which
right-handed neutrinos are neutral have been speciﬁcally considered in [11] from the point
of view of Z −Z′ mixing and the neutralino sector, in [12] where a renormalization group
(RG) analysis was performed, and in [13] where a one-loop Higgs mass upper bound was
presented.
In the next section we brieﬂy review the ESSM. In sect.3 we analyse the upper bound
on the lightest CP-even Higgs boson mass including leading two-loop corrections. Then
in sect. 4 we discuss the phenomenology of some of the extra particles predicted by the
ESSM and analyze their production cross-sections and signatures at the LHC. Our results
are summarized in sect. 5.
2.
The ESSM
One of the most important issues in models with additional Abelian gauge symmetries is
the cancellation of anomalies. In E6 theories the anomalies are cancelled automatically.
Therefore any model based on E6 subgroups which contains complete representations
should be anomaly-free. Thus in order to ensure anomaly cancellation the particle con-
tent of the ESSM should include complete fundamental 27 representations of E6. These
multiplets decompose under the SU(5) × U(1)N subgroup of E6 [12] as follows:
27i →(10, 1)i + (5∗, 2)i + (5∗, −3)i + (5, −2)i + (1, 5)i + (1, 0)i .
(2)
The ﬁrst and second quantities in the brackets are the SU(5) representation and extra
U(1)N charge while i is a family index that runs from 1 to 3. An ordinary SM family
2
