PDF page 7
Higgs doublets Hu and Hd and singlet S develop VEVs. In addition, in order to achieve
gauge coupling uniﬁcation, there is a further pair of Higgs–like doublet supermultiplets H′
and ¯H′ which do not develop VEVs, arising from an incomplete 27′ + 27
′ representation.
All the extra matter described above is expected to have mass of order the TeV scale
and may be observable at the LHC or at an ILC. The ESSM has the following desirable
features:
• Anomalies are cancelled generation by generation within each complete 27i repre-
sentation.
• Gauge coupling uniﬁcation is accomplished due to the complete 27i representations
together with the additional pair of Higgs–like doublets H′ and ¯H′ from the incom-
plete 27′ + 27
′ representation.
• The seesaw mechanism is facilitated due to the right–handed neutrinos Nc
i arising
from the 27i representations having zero gauge charges.
• The µ-problem of the MSSM is solved since the µ-term is forbidden by the U(1)N
gauge symmetry. It is replaced by a singlet coupling ˆS( ˆHd ˆHu) as in the NMSSM,
but without the ˆS3 term of the NMSSM which resulted in domain wall problems.
Besides, in the ESSM the would-be Goldstone boson is eaten by the Z′ associated
with the U(1)N gauge group.
The purpose of the remainder of this section is to develop the theoretical aspects of the
ESSM deﬁned above, and deﬁne the matter content, charges, couplings and symmetries
of the ESSM more precisely.
2.2
The choice of the surviving U(1)N gauge group
Since all matter and Higgs superﬁelds must originate from 27 and 27–plets of E6, one
cannot break E6 in a conventional manner as the required Higgs ﬁelds are in larger
representations than the 27.
However, at the string scale, E6 can be broken via the
Hosotani mechanism [41]. Because the rank of the E6 group is six the breakdown of the
E6 symmetry results in several models based on rank–5 or rank–6 gauge groups. As a
consequence E6 inspired SUSY models in general may lead to low–energy gauge groups
with one or two additional U(1)′ factors in comparison to the SM. Indeed E6 contains
the maximal subgroup SO(10) × U(1)ψ while SO(10) can be decomposed in terms of the
SU(5)×U(1)χ subgroup. By means of the Hosotani mechanism E6 can be broken directly
to SU(3)C ×SU(2)W ×U(1)Y ×U(1)ψ ×U(1)χ which has rank 6. For suitable large VEVs
of the symmetry breaking Higgs ﬁelds this rank–6 model can be reduced further to an
6
