=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:hep-ph/0510419v2  5 Dec 2005
SHEP-05-32
Theory and Phenomenology of an Exceptional
Supersymmetric Standard Model
S. F. King1, S. Moretti2, R. Nevzorov3 4
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton,
Highﬁeld, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, U.K.
Abstract
We make a comprehensive study of the theory and phenomenology of a low energy
supersymmetric standard model originating from a string-inspired E6 grand uniﬁed
gauge group. The Exceptional Supersymmetric Standard Model (ESSM) consid-
ered here is based on the low energy SM gauge group together with an extra Z′
corresponding to an extra U(1)N gauge symmetry under which right–handed neu-
trinos have zero charge. The low energy matter content of the ESSM corresponds
to three 27 representations of the E6 symmetry group, to ensure anomaly cancel-
lation, plus an additional pair of Higgs–like doublets as required for high energy
gauge coupling uniﬁcation. The ESSM is therefore a low energy alternative to the
MSSM or NMSSM. The ESSM involves extra matter beyond the MSSM contained
in three 5 + 5∗representations of SU(5), plus three SU(5) singlets which carry
U(1)N charges, one of which develops a VEV, providing the eﬀective µ term for the
Higgs doublets, as well as the necessary exotic fermion masses. We explore the RG
ﬂow of the ESSM and examine theoretical restrictions on the values of new Yukawa
couplings caused by the validity of perturbation theory up to the Grand Uniﬁcation
scale. We then discuss electroweak symmetry breaking and Higgs phenomenology,
and establish an upper limit on the mass of the lightest Higgs particle which can be
signiﬁcantly heavier than in the MSSM and NMSSM, in leading two–loop approxi-
mation. We also discuss the phenomenology of the Z′ and the extra matter, whose
discovery will provide a smoking gun signal of the model.
1E-mail: sfk@hep.phys.soton.ac.uk
2E-mail: stefano@hep.phys.soton.ac.uk
3E-mail: nevzorov@phys.soton.ac.uk.
4On leave of absence from the Theory Department, ITEP, Moscow, Russia.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1.
Introduction
Despite the absence of any evidence for new particles beyond those contained in the
Standard Model (SM), the cancellation of quadratic divergences [1] remains a compelling
theoretical argument in favour of softly broken supersymmetry (SUSY) which stabilises
the Electro-Weak (EW) scale and solves the hierarchy problem [2] (for a recent review
see [3]). SUSY also facilitates the high energy convergence of the SM gauge couplings [4]
which allows the SM gauge group to be embedded into Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUTs) [5]
based on simple gauge groups such as SU(5), SO(10) or E6. The rational U(1)Y charges,
which are postulated “ad hoc” in the case of the SM, then appear in a natural way in the
context of SUSY GUT models after the breakdown of the extended symmetry at some
high energy scale MX, providing a simple explanation of electric charge quantisation.
An additional motivation to consider models with softly broken SUSY is associated
with the possible incorporation of the gravitational interactions.
The local version of
SUSY (supergravity) leads to a partial uniﬁcation of the SM gauge interactions with
gravity. However SUpergGRAvity (SUGRA) itself is a non–renormalisable theory and
has to be considered as an eﬀective low energy limit of some renormalisable or even ﬁnite
theory. Currently, the best candidate for such an underlying theory is ten–dimensional
heterotic superstring theory based on E8 × E′
8 [6]. In the strong coupling regime of an
E8 × E′
8 heterotic string theory described by eleven dimensional SUGRA (M–theory) [7],
the string scale can be compatible with the uniﬁcation scale MX [8]. Compactiﬁcation of
the extra dimensions results in the breakdown of E8 down to E6 or one of its subgroups
in the observable sector [9]. The remaining E′
8 plays the role of a hidden sector that gives
rise to spontaneous breakdown of SUGRA, which results in a set of soft SUSY breaking
terms [10] characterised by the gravitino mass (m3/2) of order the EW scale1.
Although the theoretical argument for low energy SUSY is quite compelling, it is worth
emphasising that the choice of low energy eﬀective theory at the TeV scale consistent
with high energy conventional (or string) uniﬁcation is not uniquely speciﬁed. Although
the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM) is the best studied and simplest
candidate for such a low energy eﬀective theory, the MSSM suﬀers from the µ problem:
the superpotential of the MSSM contains one bilinear term µ ˆHd ˆHu which can be present
before SUSY is broken. As a result one would naturally expect it to be of the order of
the Planck scale MPl. If µ ≃MPl then the Higgs scalars get a huge positive contribution
∼µ2 to their squared masses and EW Symmetry Breaking (EWSB) does not occur. On
the other hand the parameter µ cannot be simply omitted. If µ = 0 at some scale Q the
1A large mass hierarchy between m3/2 and Planck scale can appear because of non–perturbative
sources of SUSY breaking in the hidden sector gauge group (for a review see [11]).
1

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
mixing between Higgs doublets is not generated at any scale below Q due to the non–
renormalisation theorems [12]. In this case the minimum of the Higgs boson potential is
attained for < Hd >= 0. Because of this down–type quarks and charged leptons remain
massless. In order to get the correct pattern of EWSB, µ is required to be of the order of
the SUSY breaking (or EW) scale.
The Next–to–Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (NMSSM) is an attempt to
solve the µ problem of the MSSM in the most direct way possible, by generating µ
dynamically as the low energy Vacuum Expectation Value (VEV) of a singlet ﬁeld. The
superpotential of the NMSSM is given by [13]–[14]
WNMSSM = λ ˆS( ˆHd ˆHu) + 1
3κ ˆS3 + WMSSM(µ = 0) .
(1)
The cubic term of the new singlet superﬁeld ˆS in the superpotential breaks an additional
U(1) global symmetry that would appear and is a common way to avoid the axion that
would result. However the NMSSM itself is not without problems. The NMSSM super-
potential is still invariant under the transformations of a discrete Z3 symmetry. This Z3
symmetry should lead to the formation of domain walls in the early universe between
regions which were causally disconnected during the period of EWSB [15]. Such domain
structure of vacuum create unacceptably large anisotropies in the cosmic microwave back-
ground radiation [16]. In an attempt to break the Z3 symmetry operators suppressed by
powers of the Planck scale could be introduced. But it has been shown that these opera-
tors give rise to quadratically divergent tadpole contributions, which destabilise the mass
hierarchy once again [17].
One solution to these diﬃculties is to consider the simplest gauge extensions of the SM
gauge group that involve an additional non–anomalous U(1)′ gauge symmetry. Models
with an additional U(1)′ factor can arise naturally out of string-inspired constructions
[18, 19]. In particular one or two extra U(1)′ factors may emerge in the breaking of a string-
inspired E6 gauge group and the phenomenology of such models has been extensively
studied in the literature [18]. Such theories may lead to a U(1)′ extension of the NMSSM
in which a SM singlet ﬁeld S couples to the Higgs doublets and yields an eﬀective µ
parameter ∼λ < S >, while the ˆS3 term is forbidden by the U(1)′ gauge symmetry. In
such models the Peccei–Quinn (PQ) symmetry becomes embedded in the new U(1)′ gauge
symmetry. Clearly there are no domain wall problems in such a model since there is no
discrete Z3 symmetry. The ﬁeld S is charged under the U(1)′ so that its expectation value
also gives mass to the new Z′ gauge boson breaking the U(1)′, in other words the would-
be PQ axion is eaten by the Z′. The extended gauge symmetry forbids an elementary µ
term as well as terms like ˆSn in the superpotential. The role of the S3 term in generating
quartic terms in the scalar potential, which stabilise the physical vacuum, is played by
2

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
D–terms.
In this paper we explore a speciﬁc E6 inspired supersymmetric realisation of the above
U(1)′ type model which is capable of resolving the µ problem as in the NMSSM, but
without facing any of its drawbacks. The total matter content of our model corresponds
to three families of 27i representations, plus two Higgs–like doublets, consistent with
SUSY uniﬁcation. A particular feature of our model is that we assume that the E6 gauge
group is broken at high energies down to the SM gauge group plus a particular extra
U(1)N gauge symmetry in which right–handed neutrinos have zero charge and so are
singlets and do not participate in the gauge interactions. Since right–handed neutrinos
have zero charges they can acquire very heavy Majorana masses and are thus suitable to
take part in the standard seesaw mechanism which yields small neutrino masses. Having
heavy right–handed neutrinos also avoids any stringent constraints on the mass of the Z′
boson coming from the nucleosynthesis and astrophysical data which would be present if
the right–handed neutrinos were light.
The above superstring inspired E6 SUSY model, henceforth referred to as the Ex-
ceptional Supersymmetric Standard Model (ESSM), provides a theoretically attractive
solution to the µ problem of the MSSM since the bilinear Higgs µ terms are forbidden by
the U(1)N gauge symmetry. This model contains three pairs of candidate Higgs doublets
H1i, H2i, plus three singlets Si, which carry U(1)N charge. These states all originate from
three 27i representations and couple together according to a 27i27j27k coupling resulting
in NMSSM type superpotential couplings of the form:
WH = P
ijk λijk ˆSi ˆH1j ˆH2k .
(2)
The breaking of the EW and U(1)N gauge symmetry down to U(1)em takes place when
some of these Higgs ﬁelds acquire VEVs. It is possible to work in a basis where only one
family of Higgs ﬁelds and singlets acquire non–zero VEVs, which we can deﬁne to be the
third family, and we can then deﬁne S ≡S3, Hd ≡H1,3, Hu ≡H2,3. We shall then refer
to the remaining ﬁrst two families Si, H1,i, H2,i, with i = 1, 2 as non–Higgs doublets and
singlets. The relation of the third family Higgs so deﬁned to the third family quarks and
leptons is more model dependent, but in the context of Radiative EWSB (REWSB) it is
natural to associate the third family Higgs to the third family quarks and leptons, since it
is the large Yukawa coupling of the third family which drives the Higgs VEVs. This also
avoids the appearance of Flavour Changing Neutral Currents (FCNCs). Then, restricting
ourselves to Higgs ﬁelds which develop VEVs, the superpotential (2) reduces to
WH →λ ˆS( ˆHd ˆHu)
(3)
which is just the NMSSM coupling in Eq. (1). After the spontaneous symmetry break-
down at the EW scale the scalar component of the superﬁeld ˆS acquires non–zero VEV
3

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
(⟨S⟩= s/
√
2) and an eﬀective µ-term (µ = λs/
√
2) of the required size is automatically
generated. The Higgs sector of the considered model contains only one additional singlet
ﬁeld and one extra parameter compared to the MSSM. Therefore it can be regarded as
the simplest extension of the Higgs sector of the MSSM.
It is interesting to compare the ESSM to other related models with an extra U(1)′.
In general anomaly cancellation requires either the presence of exotic chiral supermulti-
plets [20]–[21] or family–non–universal U(1)′ couplings [22]. Any family dependence of
the U(1)′ charges would result in FCNCs mediated by the Z′ which can be suppressed
for the ﬁrst two generation and manifest themselves in rare B decays and B −B mixing
[23]. In the ESSM, because the U(1)N charge assignment is ﬂavour–independent, the
considered model does not suﬀer from the FCNC problem. In the ESSM anomalies are
cancelled in a ﬂavour–independent way since the model contains an extra U(1)N arising
from E6 together with the matter content of (three) complete 27 representations of E6
down to the TeV scale, apart from the three right–handed neutrinos which are singlets
under the low energy gauge group. The existence of exotic supermultiplets in the ESSM
is consistent with gauge coupling uniﬁcation since the extra matter is in complete 27 rep-
resentations. However exotic quarks and non–Higgses naturally appear in the E6 inspired
model, with the quantum numbers of three families of 5+5∗SU(5) representations, which
phenomenologically correspond to three families of extra down–type quark singlets and
three families of matter with the quantum numbers of Higgs doublets, where each mul-
tiplet is accompanied by its conjugate representation. The large third family coupling of
the extra coloured chiral superﬁelds (D, ¯D) to the singlet S of the form κS(DD) may help
to induce radiative breakdown of the SU(2) × U(1)Y × U(1)′ symmetry [20], [24]–[27].
Before describing the phenomenological work performed in this paper it is worth brieﬂy
reviewing the phenomenological studies performed so far on related models in the litera-
ture. Recently the implications of SUSY models with an additional U(1)′ gauge symmetry
have been studied for CP–violation [28], neutrino physics [29]–[30], dark matter [31], lep-
togenesis [32], EW baryogenesis [33]–[34], muon anomalous magnetic moment [35], electric
dipole moment of electron [36], lepton ﬂavour violating processes like µ →eγ [37] (for-
bidding R–parity violating terms [21], [38]). An important property of U(1)′ models is
that the tree–level mass of the lightest Higgs particle can be larger than MZ even for
moderate values of tan β ≃1 −2 [27]–[28], [39], hence the existing LEP bounds can be
satisﬁed with almost no need for large radiative corrections. Models with a U(1)N gauge
symmetry in which right–handed neutrinos have zero charge have been studied in [30] in
the context of non–standard neutrino models with extra singlets, in [40] from the point
of view of Z −Z′ mixing and a discussion of the neutralino sector, in [25] where the RG
was studied, in [27] where a one–loop Higgs mass upper bound was presented.
4

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
The phenomenological analysis presented here goes well beyond what has appeared so
far in the literature. Our analysis begins with a detailed RG analysis of the dimensionless
couplings in the ESSM, and an examination of the ﬁxed points of the model. This analysis
is completely new as it has not appeared before. We later use the results of this analysis
in determining an upper bound on the lightest CP–even (or scalar) Higgs boson mass,
using the eﬀective potential and including two–loop corrections, which had also not been
considered previously, and we make a detailed comparison with similar bounds obtained
in the MSSM and NMSSM. We then make a comprehensive phenomenological study of
the full Higgs spectrum and couplings, which includes the low energy allowed regions
in which EWSB is successful, and comment on the crucial phenomenological aspects of
the Higgs sector of the ESSM. The chargino and neutralino spectrum expected in the
ESSM is also studied in some depth. We then discuss the phenomenology of the extra
particles predicted by the ESSM, including the Z′ and some exotic fermions, and provide
a numerical estimate and a full discussion of their production cross sections and signatures
at the upcoming CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and a future International Linear
Collider (ILC).
The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we specify our model. In section 3
we examine the RG ﬂow of gauge and Yukawa couplings assuming that gauge coupling
uniﬁcation takes place at high energies. The EWSB and Higgs phenomenology are studied
in sections 4 and 5 respectively. In section 6 we consider the chargino and neutralino
spectrum in the ESSM while in section 7 the potential discovery of a Z′ boson and new
exotic particles at future colliders are discussed. Our results are summarised in section 8.
2.
The ESSM
2.1
Overview of the model
As it is clear from the discussion in the Introduction, the ESSM is a low energy alternative
to the MSSM or NMSSM deﬁned as follows. The ESSM originates from an E6 GUT gauge
group which is broken at the GUT scale to the SM gauge group together with an additional
U(1)N gauge group which is not broken until a scale not very far above the EW scale,
giving rise to an observable Z′ gauge boson. The U(1)N gauge group is deﬁned such
that right–handed neutrinos Nc
i carry zero charges under it. The matter content below
the GUT scale corresponds to three 27–plets of E6 (labelled as 27i) which contain the
three ordinary families of quarks and leptons including right–handed neutrinos Nc
i , three
families of candidate Higgs doublets H1i, H2i, three families of extra down-type quark
singlets Di, ¯Di, and three families of extra singlets Si. However only the third family
5

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Higgs doublets Hu and Hd and singlet S develop VEVs. In addition, in order to achieve
gauge coupling uniﬁcation, there is a further pair of Higgs–like doublet supermultiplets H′
and ¯H′ which do not develop VEVs, arising from an incomplete 27′ + 27
′ representation.
All the extra matter described above is expected to have mass of order the TeV scale
and may be observable at the LHC or at an ILC. The ESSM has the following desirable
features:
• Anomalies are cancelled generation by generation within each complete 27i repre-
sentation.
• Gauge coupling uniﬁcation is accomplished due to the complete 27i representations
together with the additional pair of Higgs–like doublets H′ and ¯H′ from the incom-
plete 27′ + 27
′ representation.
• The seesaw mechanism is facilitated due to the right–handed neutrinos Nc
i arising
from the 27i representations having zero gauge charges.
• The µ-problem of the MSSM is solved since the µ-term is forbidden by the U(1)N
gauge symmetry. It is replaced by a singlet coupling ˆS( ˆHd ˆHu) as in the NMSSM,
but without the ˆS3 term of the NMSSM which resulted in domain wall problems.
Besides, in the ESSM the would-be Goldstone boson is eaten by the Z′ associated
with the U(1)N gauge group.
The purpose of the remainder of this section is to develop the theoretical aspects of the
ESSM deﬁned above, and deﬁne the matter content, charges, couplings and symmetries
of the ESSM more precisely.
2.2
The choice of the surviving U(1)N gauge group
Since all matter and Higgs superﬁelds must originate from 27 and 27–plets of E6, one
cannot break E6 in a conventional manner as the required Higgs ﬁelds are in larger
representations than the 27.
However, at the string scale, E6 can be broken via the
Hosotani mechanism [41]. Because the rank of the E6 group is six the breakdown of the
E6 symmetry results in several models based on rank–5 or rank–6 gauge groups. As a
consequence E6 inspired SUSY models in general may lead to low–energy gauge groups
with one or two additional U(1)′ factors in comparison to the SM. Indeed E6 contains
the maximal subgroup SO(10) × U(1)ψ while SO(10) can be decomposed in terms of the
SU(5)×U(1)χ subgroup. By means of the Hosotani mechanism E6 can be broken directly
to SU(3)C ×SU(2)W ×U(1)Y ×U(1)ψ ×U(1)χ which has rank 6. For suitable large VEVs
of the symmetry breaking Higgs ﬁelds this rank–6 model can be reduced further to an
6

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
eﬀective rank–5 model with only one extra gauge symmetry. Then an extra U(1)′ that
appears at low energies is a linear combination of U(1)χ and U(1)ψ:
U(1)′ = U(1)χ cos θ + U(1)ψ sin θ .
(4)
In general the right–handed neutrinos will carry non–zero charges with respect to the
extra gauge interaction U(1)′. It means that their mass terms are forbidden by the gauge
symmetry.
The right–handed neutrinos can gain masses only after the breakdown of
the SU(2)W × U(1)Y × U(1)′ symmetry. But even in this case one can expect that the
corresponding mass terms should be suppressed due to the invariance of the low–energy
eﬀective Lagrangian under the U(1)L symmetry associated with lepton number conserva-
tion2. If the right–handed neutrinos were lighter than a few MeV they would be produced
prior to big bang nucleosynthesis by the Z′ interactions leading to a faster expansion rate
of the Universe and to a higher
4He relic abundance [42]. The current cosmological
observations of cosmic microwave background radiation and nuclear abundances restrict
the total eﬀective number of extra neutrino species ∆Nν to 0.3 [43]. The strength of the
interactions of right–handed neutrinos with other particles and the equivalent number of
additional neutrinos rises with a decreasing Z′ boson mass. Thus cosmological and as-
trophysical observations set a stringent limit on the Z′ mass which has to be larger than
4.3 TeV [42].
The situation changes dramatically if the right–handed neutrinos remain sterile after
the breakdown of the E6 symmetry, i.e. have zero charges under the surviving gauge
group. The extra U(1)′ factor for which right–handed neutrinos transform trivially is
called U(1)N. It corresponds to the angle θ = arctan
√
15 in Eq. (4). In this case, consid-
ered here, the right–handed neutrinos may be superheavy. Then the three known doublet
neutrinos νe, νµ and ντ acquire small Majorana masses via the seesaw mechanism. This
allows for a comprehensive understanding of the mass hierarchy in the lepton sector and
neutrino oscillations data. The successful leptogenesis in the early epoch of the Universe
is the distinctive feature of the ESSM with an extra U(1)N factor [32]. Because right–
handed neutrinos are allowed to have large masses, they may decay into ﬁnal states with
lepton number L = ±1, thereby creating a lepton asymmetry in the early Universe [44].
Since sphalerons violate B + L but conserve B −L, this lepton asymmetry subsequently
gets converted into the present observed baryon asymmetry of the Universe through the
EW phase transition [45]. Any other E6 inspired supersymmetric extension with the extra
U(1) factor would result in B −L violating interactions at O(1) TeV as it is broken down
to the SM. This B −L violating interactions together with B + L violating sphalerons
2In many supersymmetric models the invariance under the lepton and baryon U(1) symmetries are
caused by R–parity conservation which is normally imposed to prevent rapid proton decay.
7

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
would erase any lepton or baryon asymmetry that may have been created during the ear-
lier epoch of the Universe. Diﬀerent phenomenological aspects of supersymmetric models
with an extra U(1)N gauge symmetry were studied in [25], [27], [30], [32], [34], [40].
One of the most important issues in U(1)′ models is the cancellation of the gauge and
gravitational anomalies. In E6 theories the anomalies are cancelled automatically. There-
fore all models that are based on the E6 subgroups and contain complete representations
should be anomaly–free. As a result in order to make the chosen supersymmetric model
with the extra U(1)N factor anomaly–free one is forced to augment the minimal spectrum
by a number of exotics which, together with ordinary quarks and leptons, form complete
fundamental 27 representations of E6. These decompose under the surviving low energy
gauge group as discussed in the next subsection.
2.3
The low energy matter content of the ESSM
The three families of fundamental 27i representations decompose under the SU(5)×U(1)N
subgroup of E6 [25] as follows:
27i →(10, 1)i + (5∗, 2)i + (5∗, −3)i + (5, −2)i + (1, 5)i + (1, 0)i .
(5)
The ﬁrst and second quantities in the brackets are the SU(5) representation and extra
U(1)N charge while i is a family index that runs from 1 to 3. An ordinary SM family
which contains the doublets of left–handed quarks Qi and leptons Li, right–handed up–
and down–type quarks (uc
i and dc
i) as well as right–handed charged leptons, is assigned
to the (10, 1)i + (5∗, 2)i. These representations decompose under
SU(5) × U(1)N →SU(3)C × SU(2)W × U(1)Y × U(1)N
(6)
to give ordinary quarks and leptons:
(10, 1)i
→
Qi = (ui, di) ∼

3, 2, 1
6, 1

,
uc
i ∼

3∗, 1, −2
3, 1

,
ec
i ∼(1, 1, 1, 1) ;
(5∗, 2)i
→
dc
i ∼

3∗, 1, 1
3, 2

,
Li = (νi, ei) ∼

1, 2, −1
2, 2

,
(7)
where the third quantity in the brackets is the U(1)Y hypercharge. (In Eq. (7) and further
we omit all isospin and colour indexes related to SU(2) and SU(3) gauge interactions.)
The right–handed neutrinos Nc
i transform trivially under SU(5)×U(1)N by deﬁnition.
Therefore Nc
i should be associated with the last term in Eq. (5) (1, 0)i. The next–to–last
8

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
term in Eq. (5), (1, 5)i, represents SM singlet ﬁelds Si which carry non–zero U(1)N charges
and therefore survive down to the EW scale.
The remaining representations in Eq. (5) decompose as follows:
(5∗, −3)i
→
H1i = (H0
1i, H−
1i) ∼

1, 2, −1
2, −3

,
Di ∼

3∗, 1, 1
3, −3

,
(5, −2)i
→
H2i = (H+
2i, H0
2i) ∼

1, 2, 1
2, −2

,
Di ∼

3, 1, −1
3, −2

.
(8)
The pair of SU(2)–doublets (H1i and H2i) that are contained in (5∗, −3)i and (5, −2)i
have the quantum numbers of Higgs doublets. Other components of these exotic SU(5)
multiplets form extra colour triplet but EW singlet quarks Di and anti–quarks ¯Di with
electric charges −1/3 and +1/3 respectively. The exotic multiplets in Eq. (8) form vector
pairs under the SM gauge group.
In addition to the three complete 27i representations just discussed, some components
of additional 27′ and 27′ representations can and must survive to low energies, in order
to preserve gauge coupling uniﬁcation. We assume that an additional SU(2) doublet and
anti–doublet H′ and ¯H′ originate as incomplete multiplets of an additional 27′ and 27′.
Speciﬁcally we assume that they originate from the SU(2) doublet components of a (5∗, 2)
from a 27′, and the corresponding anti–doublet from a 27′.
The low energy matter content of the ESSM may then be summarised as:
3 [(Qi, uc
i, dc
i, Li, ec
i, Nc
i )] + 3(Si) + 3(H2i) + 3(H1i) + 3(Di, ¯Di) + H′ + ¯H′ ,
(9)
where the right–handed neutrinos Nc
i are expected to gain masses at some intermediate
scale, while the remaining matter survives down to the EW scale near which the gauge
group U(1)N is broken.
2.4
The low energy symmetries and couplings of the ESSM
In E6 models the renormalisable part of the superpotential comes from the 27 × 27 × 27
decomposition of the E6 fundamental representation. The most general renormalisable
superpotential which is allowed by the SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1)Y × U(1)N gauge symmetry
can be written in the following form:
Wtotal = W0 + W1 + W2 + W✚✚
E6 .
(10)
9

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
The ﬁrst, second and third terms in Eq. (10) represent the most general form of the
superpotential allowed by the E6 symmetry. W0, W1 and W2 are given by
W0
=
λijkSi(H1jH2k) + κijkSi(DjDk) + hN
ijkNc
i (H2jLk) + hU
ijkuc
i(H2jQk)+
+hD
ijkdc
i(H1jQk) + hE
ijkec
i(H1jLk) ,
W1
=
gQ
ijkDi(QjQk) + gq
ijkDidc
juc
k ,
W2
=
gN
ijkNc
i Djdc
k + gE
ijkec
iDjuc
k + gD
ijk(QiLj)Dk .
(11)
The part of the superpotential (10) coming from the 27 × 27 × 27 decomposition of the
E6 fundamental representation (i.e. W0 + W1 + W2) possesses a global U(1) symmetry
that can be associated with B −L number conservation. This enlarged global symmetry
is broken explicitly by most of the terms in W✚✚
E6.
The last part of the superpotential (10) includes the E6 violating set of terms:
W✚✚
E6 = 1
2MijNc
i Nc
j + W ′
0 + W ′
1 + W ′
2 ,
(12)
where
W ′
0 = µ′(H′H
′) + µ′
i(H
′Li) + hijNc
i (H2jH′) + hH′
ij ec
i(H1jH′) ,
W ′
1 = σijk
3 Nc
i Nc
j Nc
k + ΛkNc
k + λijSi(H1jH
′) + gN
ij Nc
i (H
′Lj)
+gN
i Nc
i (H
′H′) + gU
ijuc
i(H
′Qj) + µij(H2iLj) + µi(H2iH′) + µ′
ijDidc
j ,
W ′
2 = gH′
ij (QiH′)Dj ,
i, j, k = 1, 2, 3 .
(13)
The terms in Eq. (12) are invariant with respect to the SM gauge group and extra U(1)N
transformations but are either forbidden by the E6 symmetry itself or by the splitting of
complete 27 and 27 representations that also breaks E6. Some of the interactions listed
in Eq. (12) can play a crucial role in low–energy phenomenology. For example, Majorana
mass terms of the right–handed neutrinos at some intermediate scales provide small Ma-
jorana masses for the three species of left–handed neutrinos via the seesaw mechanism.
Some other terms in Eqs. (12)–(13) (like µijH2iLj) may be potentially dangerous from
the phenomenological point of view.
Although the B −L number is conserved automatically in E6 inspired SUSY models,
some Yukawa interactions in Eq. (11) violate baryon number resulting in rapid proton
decay. The baryon and lepton number violating operators can be suppressed by postulat-
ing the invariance of the Lagrangian under R–parity transformations. In the MSSM the
R–parity quantum numbers are
R = (−1)3(B−L)+2S .
(14)
10

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
The straightforward generalisation of the deﬁnition of R–parity to E6 inspired super-
symmetric models, assuming BD = 1/3 and BD = −1/3, implies that W1 and W2 are
forbidden by the discrete symmetry (14). In this case the rest of the Lagrangian of the
considered model, which is allowed by the E6 symmetry, is invariant not only with respect
to U(1)L and U(1)B but also under U(1)D symmetry transformations3
D →eiαD ,
D →e−iαD .
(15)
The U(1)D invariance ensures that the lightest exotic quark is stable.
Any heavy
stable particle would have been copiously produced during the very early epochs of the
Big Bang. Those strong or electromagnetically interacting fermions and bosons which
survive annihilation would subsequently have been conﬁned in heavy hadrons which would
annihilate further. The remaining heavy hadrons originating from the Big Bang should
be present in terrestrial matter. There are very strong upper limits on the abundances
of nuclear isotopes which contain such stable relics in the mass range from 1 GeV to
10 TeV. Diﬀerent experiments set limits on their relative concentrations from 10−15 to
10−30 per nucleon [46]. At the same time various theoretical estimations [47] show that
if remnant particles would exist in nature today their concentration is expected to be at
the level of 10−10 per nucleon. Therefore E6 inspired models with stable exotic quarks or
non–Higgsinos are ruled out.
To prevent rapid proton decay in E6 supersymmetric models the deﬁnition of R–parity
should be modiﬁed. There are 8 diﬀerent ways to impose an appropriate Z2 symmetry
resulting in baryon and lepton number conservation [48]. The requirements of successful
leptogenesis and non–zero neutrino masses single out only two ways to do that. If H1i, H2i,
Si, Di, Di and quark superﬁelds (Qi, uc
i, dc
i) are even under Z2 while lepton superﬁelds
(Li, ec
i, Nc
i ) and survival components of 27 and 27 (H′ and H
′) are odd, all terms in
W2 are forbidden. Then the part of the superpotential allowed by the E6 symmetry is
invariant with respect to U(1)B and U(1)L global symmetries if the exotic quarks Di and
Di carry twice larger baryon number than the ordinary quark ﬁelds dc
i and Qi respectively.
It implies that Di and Di are diquark and anti–diquark, i.e. BD = −2/3 and BD = 2/3.
This way of suppressing baryon and lepton number violating operators will be called
further Model I. An alternative possibility is to assume that the exotic quarks Di and Di
as well as ordinary lepton superﬁelds and survivors are all odd under Z2 whereas the others
remain even. Then we get Model II in which all Yukawa interactions in W1 are ruled out
by the discrete Z2 symmetry. Model II possesses two extra U(1) global symmetries. They
can be associated with U(1)L and U(1)B if the exotic quarks carry baryon (BD = 1/3 and
3The term µ′
ijDidc
j in W✚
✚
E6 spoils the invariance under U(1)D symmetry but the mechanism of its
generation remains unclear.
11

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
BD = −1/3) and lepton (LD = 1 and LD = −1) numbers simultaneously. It means that
Di and Di are leptoquarks in Model II.
In Model II the imposed Z2 symmetry forbids all the terms in the W ′
1 part of W✚✚
E6,
leaving only the mass terms for the right–handed neutrinos, W ′
0 and W ′
2. The discrete
symmetry postulated in the Model I also rules out W ′
2 but permits µ′
ijDidc
j which violate
baryon number making possible the transition p →π+χ0, where χ0 is a neutralino. In
order to suppress dangerous operators one can impose another Z2 symmetry that changes
the sign of the ordinary quark superﬁelds Qi, uc
i, dc
i leaving all others unchanged. Finally
for the superpotentials of Model I and II we get
I)
WESSM I
=
W0 + W1 + 1
2MijNc
i Nc
j + W ′
0 ,
II)
WESSM II
=
W0 + W2 + 1
2MijNc
i Nc
j + W ′
0 + W ′
2.
(16)
2.5
Origin of bilinear mass terms in the ESSM
In the superpotentials (16) the non–Higgs doublets and the survival components from
the 27′ can be redeﬁned in such a way that only one SU(2) doublet H′ interacts with
the H
′ from the 27′.
As a result without loss of generality µ′
i in W ′
0 may be set to
zero.
Then the superpotentials of the considered supersymmetric models include two
types of bilinear terms only. One of them, 1
2MijNc
i Nc
j , determines the spectrum of the
right–handed neutrinos which are expected to be heavy so that the corresponding mass
parameters Mij are at intermediate mass scales. Another one, µ′H′H
′, is characterised by
the mass parameter µ′ which should not be too large otherwise it spoils gauge coupling
uniﬁcation in the ESSM. On the other hand, the parameter µ cannot be too small since
µ′H′H
′ is solely responsible for the mass of the charged and neutral components of H
′.
Therefore we typically require µ′ ∼O(1 TeV) as in the MSSM, potentially giving rise to
the µ problem once again.
Within SUGRA models the appropriate term µ′H′H
′ in the superpotentials (16) can
be induced just after the breakdown of local SUSY if the K¨ahler potential contains an
extra term (Z(H′H
′) + h.c) [49]. This mechanism is of course just the same one used in
the MSSM to solve the µ problem. But in superstring inspired models the bilinear terms
involving Hd and Hu are forbidden by the E6 symmetry both in the K¨ahler potential and
superpotential. As a result the mechanism mentioned above cannot be applied for the
generation of µHdHu in the ESSM superpotential. However this mechanism may be used
to give mass to the non–Higgs doublets H′ and H
′ from additional 27′ and 27′ since the
corresponding bilinear terms are allowed by the E6 symmetry both in the K¨ahler potential
and superpotential.
12

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
The other bilinear terms in the superpotential of the E6 inspired SUSY models respon-
sible for right–handed neutrino masses can be induced through the non–renormalisable
interactions of 27 and 27 of the form καβ
MP l
(27α 27β)2. If the Nc
H and N
c
H components
of some extra 27H and 27H representations develop VEVs along the D–ﬂat direction
< Nc
H >=< N
c
H > the original gauge symmetry of the rank–6 superstring inspired model
with extra U(1)ψ and U(1)χ reduces to SU(3)C × SU(2)W × U(1)Y × U(1)N. In this case
the eﬀective mass terms for the right–handed neutrinos are generated automatically if the
extra 27H–plet couples to the ordinary matter representations
δW = κij
MP l
(27H 27i)(27H 27j)
=⇒
Mij = 2κij
MP l
< N
c
H >2 .
(17)
To get a reasonable pattern for the left–handed neutrino masses and mixing the U(1)ψ
and U(1)χ gauge symmetries should be broken down to the U(1)N one around the Grand
Uniﬁcation or Planck scale. A similar mechanism could be applied for the generation
of the µ term discussed earlier. However it is rather diﬃcult to use the same ﬁelds Nc
H
and N
c
H in both cases because the values of the corresponding mass parameters are too
diﬀerent.
In order to obtain µ in the TeV range one should assume the existence of
additional pair of Nc′
H and N
c′
H which acquire VEVs of order 1011 GeV.
2.6
Yukawa couplings in the ESSM
The superpotential (16) of the ESSM involves a lot of new Yukawa couplings in com-
parison to the SM. But only large Yukawa couplings are signiﬁcant for the study of the
renormalisation group ﬂow and spectrum of new particles which will be analysed in the
subsequent sections. The observed mass hierarchy of quarks and charged leptons implies
that most of the Yukawa couplings in the SM and MSSM are small.
Therefore it is
natural to assume some hierarchical structure of the Yukawa interactions of new exotic
particles with ordinary quarks and leptons as well. As discussed earlier, without loss of
generality we can assume that only the third family Higgs doublets and singlets S ≡S3,
Hd ≡H13, Hu ≡H23 gain VEVs, and furthermore the third family Higgs sector couples
most strongly with the third family quarks and leptons. The third family SM singlet ﬁeld
S will also couple to the exotic quarks Di and Di and SU(2) non–Higgs doublets H1α and
H2α (α = 1, 2).
Discrete and extended gauge symmetries, which were speciﬁed before, do not guarantee
the absence of FCNCs in the ESSM. Indeed the considered model contains many SU(2)
doublets and exotic quarks which interact with ordinary quarks and charged leptons of
diﬀerent generations.
Therefore one may expect that even in the basis of their mass
eigenstates the non–diagonal ﬂavour transitions are not forbidden. For example, non–
diagonal ﬂavour interactions contribute to the amplitude of K0 −K
0 oscillations and
13

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
give rise to new channels of muon decay like µ →e−e+e−. To suppress ﬂavour changing
processes one can postulate ZH
2
symmetry. If all superﬁelds except Hu, Hd and S are
odd under ZH
2 symmetry transformations then only one Higgs doublet Hd interacts with
the down–type quarks and charged leptons and only one Higgs doublet Hu couples to
up–type quarks while the couplings of all other exotic particles to the ordinary quarks
and leptons are forbidden. This eliminates any problems related with the non–diagonal
ﬂavour transitions in the considered model.
The most general ZH
2 and gauge invariant part of the ESSM superpotential that de-
scribes the interactions of the SM singlet ﬁelds Si with exotic quarks, SU(2) Higgs and
non–Higgs doublets can be written as
λijkSi(H1jH2k) + κijkSi(DjDk) −→λiS(H1iH2i) + κiS(DiDi)+
+fαβSα(HdH2β) + ˜fαβSα(H1βHu) ,
(18)
where α, β = 1, 2 and i = 1, 2, 3 . In Eq. (18) we choose the basis of non–Higgs and exotic
quark superﬁelds so that the Yukawa couplings of the singlet ﬁeld S have ﬂavour diagonal
structure. Here we deﬁne λ ≡λ3 and κ ≡κ3 4. If λ or κ are large at the Grand Uniﬁcation
scale they aﬀect the evolution of the soft scalar mass m2
S of the singlet ﬁeld S rather
strongly resulting in negative values of m2
S at low energies that triggers the breakdown
of U(1)N symmetry. The singlet VEV must be large enough to generate suﬃciently large
masses for the exotic particles to avoid conﬂict with direct particle searches at present
and former accelerators. This also implies that the Yukawa couplings λi and κi (i̸ = 3)
involving the new exotic particles although small must be large enough. The Yukawa
couplings of other SM singlets fαβ and ˜fαβ are expected to be considerably less than λi
and κi to ensure that only one singlet ﬁeld S gains a VEV. At the same time fαβ and ˜fαβ
cannot be negligibly small because in this case the fermion components of superﬁelds S1
and S2 becomes extremely light 5. The induced masses of singlinos ˜S1 and ˜S2 should be
larger a few MeV otherwise the extra states could contribute to the expansion rate prior
to nucleosynthesis changing nuclear abundances.
The ZH
2 symmetry discussed above forbids all terms in W1 and W2 that would allow
the exotic quarks to decay. Therefore discrete ZH
2 symmetry can only be approximate.
In our model we allow only the third family SU(2) doublets Hd and Hu to have Yukawa
couplings to the ordinary quarks and leptons of the order unity. As discussed, this is a
self-consistent assumption since the large Yukawa couplings of the third generation (in
4Note that κ as deﬁned here in the ESSM refers to the coupling of the singlet S to the third family
exotic quarks DD, and is not related to the κ of the NMSSM which refers to the cubic singlet coupling
S3 which is absent in the ESSM.
5When fαβ and ˜fαβ vanish singlinos ˜S1 and ˜S2 remain massless.
14

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
particular, the top–quark Yukawa coupling) provides a radiative mechanism for generating
the Higgs VEVs [50] which deﬁnes the third family direction. As a consequence the neutral
components of Hu and Hd acquire non–zero VEVs inducing the masses of ordinary quarks
and leptons. The Yukawa couplings of two other pairs of SU(2) doublets H1i and H2i
as well as H′ and exotic quarks to the quarks and leptons of the third generation are
supposed to be signiﬁcantly smaller (≲0.1) so that none of the other exotic bosons
gain a VEV. These couplings break ZH
2 symmetry explicitly resulting in ﬂavour changing
neutral currents. In order to suppress the contribution of new particles and interactions
to the K0 −K
0 oscillations and to the muon decay channel µ →e−e+e−in accordance
with experimental limits, it is necessary to assume that the Yukawa couplings of exotic
particles to the quarks of the ﬁrst and second generations are less than 10−4 and their
couplings to the leptons of the ﬁrst two generations are smaller than 10−3.
3.
Renormalisation group analysis
3.1
The approximate superpotential to be studied
Following the discussion about the natural choice of the parameters in our model given
at the end of section 2, we can now specify the superpotential couplings whose RG ﬂow
will be analysed in this section. In our RG analysis we shall retain only Yukawa couplings
which appear on the right–hand side of Eq. (18), together with the O(1) Yukawa couplings
to the quarks and leptons. We shall neglect the neutrino Yukawa couplings as well as the
small couplings involving the ﬁrst and second family singlets in our analysis. Then the
approximate superpotential studied is given by:
W0 ≈λS(HdHu) + λ1S(H1,1H2,1) + λ2S(H1,2H2,2) + κS(D3D3)+
+κ1S(D1D1) + κ2S(D2D2) + ht(HuQ)tc + hb(HdQ)bc + hτ(HdL)τ c ,
(19)
where all ordinary quark and lepton superﬁelds appeared in Eq. (19) belong to the third
generation, i.e. L = L3, Q = Q3, tc = uc
3, bc = dc
3 and τ c = ec
3. Here we adopt the
notation λ = λ3 and κ = κ3. The obtained superpotential possesses the approximate
ZH
2 symmetry speciﬁed in the previous section which ensures the natural suppression of
FCNCs. To guarantee that only one pair of SU(2) doublets Hu and Hd acquires a VEV
we impose a certain hierarchy between the couplings of H1i and H2i to the SM singlet
superﬁeld S: λ ≳λ1,2. We assume further that the superpotential (19) is formed near
the Grand Uniﬁcation or Planck scale. But in order to compute the masses and couplings
at the EW scale one has to determine the values of gauge and Yukawa couplings at the
EW scale. The evolution of all masses and couplings from MX to MZ is described by a
15

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
system of RG equations. In this section we study the behaviour of the solutions to such
equations describing the gauge and Yukawa couplings in the framework of the ESSM.
3.2
The mixing of U(1)Y and U(1)N
In this subsection we address a mixing phenomenon related with the gauge sector of
models containing two U(1) gauge factors. In the Lagrangian of any gauge extension
of the SM containing an additional U(1)′ gauge group there can appear a kinetic term
consistent with all symmetries which mixes the gauge ﬁelds of the U(1)′ and U(1)Y [51].
Our model is not an exception in this respect. In the basis in which the interactions
between gauge and matter ﬁelds have the canonical form, i.e. for instance a covariant
derivative Dµ which acts on the scalar and fermion components of the left–handed quark
superﬁeld given by
Dµ = ∂µ −ig3Aa
µT a −ig2W b
µτ b −igY QY
i BY
µ −igNQN
i BN
µ ,
(20)
the pure gauge kinetic part of the Lagrangian can be written as
Lkin = −1
4
 F Y
µν
2 −1
4
 F N
µν
2 −sin χ
2
F Y
µνF N
µν −1
4 (Gµν)2 −1
4 (Wµν)2 .
(21)
In Eqs. (20)–(21) Aa
µ, W b
µ, BY
µ and BN
µ represent SU(3), SU(2), U(1)Y and U(1)N gauge
ﬁelds, Ga
µν, W b
µν, F Y
µν and F N
µν are ﬁeld strengths for the corresponding gauge interactions,
while g3, g2, gY and gN are SU(3), SU(2), U(1)Y and U(1)N gauge couplings respectively.
Because U(1)Y and U(1)N arise from the breaking of the simple gauge group E6 the
parameter sin χ that parametrises the gauge kinetic term mixing is equal to zero at tree–
level. However it arises from loop eﬀects since
Tr
 QY QN
=
X
i= chiral ﬁelds
 QY
i QN
i
̸
= 0 .
(22)
Here the trace is restricted to the states lighter than the energy scale being considered.
The complete E6 multiplets do not contribute to this trace. Its non–zero value is due to
the incomplete 27′ + 27′ multiplets of the original E6 symmetry from which only H′ and
H′ survive to low energy in order to ensure gauge coupling uniﬁcation.
The mixing in the gauge kinetic part of the Lagrangian (21) can be easily eliminated
by means of a non–unitary transformation of the two U(1) gauge ﬁelds [26], [52]–[53]:
BY
µ = B1µ −B2µ tan χ ,
BN
µ = B2µ/ cos χ .
(23)
In terms of the new gauge variables B1µ and B2µ the gauge kinetic part of the Lagrangian
(21) is now diagonal and the covariant derivative (20) becomes [51]
Dµ = ∂µ −ig3Aa
µT a −ig2W b
µτ b −ig1QY
i B1µ −i(g′
1QN
i + g11QY
i )B2µ ,
(24)
16

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
where the redeﬁned gauge coupling constants, written in terms of the original ones, are
g1 = gY ,
g′
1 = gN/ cos χ ,
g11 = −gY tan χ .
(25)
In the new Lagrangian written in terms of the new gauge variables B1µ and B2µ (deﬁned
in Eq. (23)) the mixing eﬀect is concealed in the interaction between the U(1)N gauge
ﬁeld and matter ﬁelds. The gauge coupling constant g′
1 is varied from the original one
and also a new oﬀ–diagonal gauge coupling g11 appears. The covariant derivative (24)
can be rewritten in a more compact form
Dµ = ∂µ −ig3Aa
µT a −ig2W b
µτ b −iQTGBµ ,
(26)
where QT = (QY
i , QN
i ), BT
µ = (B1µ, B2µ) and G is a 2 × 2 matrix of new gauge couplings
(25)
G =

g1
g11
0
g′
1

.
(27)
Now all physical phenomena can be considered by using this new Lagrangian with the
modiﬁed structure of the extra U(1)N interaction (24)–(26). In the considered approx-
imation the gauge kinetic mixing changes eﬀectively the U(1)N charges of the ﬁelds to
˜Qi ≡QN
i + QY
i δ,
(28)
where δ = g11/g′
1 while the U(1)Y charges remain the same.
As the gauge coupling
constants are scale dependent, the eﬀective U(1)N charges deﬁned here as ˜Qi are scale
dependent as well. The particle spectrum now depends on the eﬀective U(1)N charges
˜Qi.
In Eq. (28) the correct E6 normalisation of the charges should be used, and thus the
U(1)Y hypercharges in Eqs. (7)–(8) should be multiplied by a factor
r
3
5, and the QN
charges in Eqs. (7)–(8) should be multiplied by 1/
√
40. The correctly normalised charges
of all the matter ﬁelds in the ESSM are summarised in Table 1. The charges are family
independent, and the index i here refers to the diﬀerent multiplets as well as the diﬀerent
families.
3.3
The running of the gauge couplings
At the one–loop level the full set of RG equations describing the running of gauge and
Yukawa couplings splits into two parts. One of them includes RG equations for the gauge
couplings.
In the one–loop approximation β functions of the gauge couplings do not
17

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Q
uc
dc
L
ec
Nc
S
H2
H1
D
D
H′
H′
q
5
3QY
i
1
6
−2
3
1
3
−1
2
1
0
0
1
2
−1
2
−1
3
1
3
−1
2
1
2
√
40QN
i
1
1
2
2
1
0
5
−2
−3
−2
−3
2
−2
Table 1: The U(1)Y and U(1)N charges of matter ﬁelds in the ESSM, where QN
i and QY
i are here deﬁned
with the correct E6 normalisation factor required for the RG analysis.
depend on the Yukawa ones. Therefore this part of the system of RG equations can be
analysed separately, and is discussed in this subsection.
The RG ﬂow of the Abelian gauge couplings is aﬀected by the kinetic term mixing
as discussed in the previous subsection. Using the matrix notation for the structure of
U(1) interactions with G deﬁned in Eq. (27) one can write down the RG equations for
the Abelian couplings in a compact form [26], [52]–[53]
dG
dt = G × B ,
(29)
where B is a 2 × 2 matrix of β functions given by
B =

B1
B11
0
B′
1

=
1
(4π)2

β1g2
1
2g1g′
1β11 + 2g1g11β1
0
g
′2
1 β′
1 + 2g′
1g11β11 + g2
11β1

.
(30)
In the ESSM with Ng = 3 the one–loop β functions β1, β′
1 and β11 are
β1 =
X
i
(QY
i )2 = 48
5 ,
β′
1 =
X
i
(QN
i )2 = 47
5 ,
β11 =
X
i
QY
i QN
i = ∓
√
6
5 .(31)
The index i is summed over all possible chiral superﬁelds and all families. Note that
β1 ≈β′
1 ≫β11. This implies that the eﬀect of U(1) gauge mixing is ultimately rather
small, and furthemore that, if the (properly normalised) gY and gN start out equal at the
GUT scale, then they will remain approximately equal at low energies.
The running of SU(2) and SU(3) couplings obey the RG equations of the standard
form:
dg2
dt = β2g3
2
(4π)2 ,
dg3
dt = β3g3
3
(4π)2 ,
(32)
with β functions
β2 = −5 + 3Ng ,
β3 = −9 + 3Ng ,
(33)
where t = ln (µ/MX) and µ is the RG scale. The parameter Ng appeared in the expressions
for β2 and β3 is the number of generations forming E6 fundamental representations which
the considered SUSY model involves at low energies. As one can easily see from Eq. (33)
Ng = 3 is the critical value for the one–loop β function of strong interactions. Since by
18

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
construction three complete 27–plets survive to low energies in the ESSM β3 is equal to
zero in our case and SU(3) gauge coupling remains constant everywhere from MZ to MX.
Because complete 27–plets do not violate E6 symmetry each generation should give the
same contribution to all β functions. It takes place automatically in the case of SU(2)
and SU(3) β functions and allows to obtain a correct normalisation for the charges of two
U(1)′s.
The RG equations for the gauge couplings in Eqs. (29) and (32) should be supple-
mented by the boundary conditions. Since we deal with an E6 inspired model it seems
to be natural to assume that at high energies E6 symmetry is restored and all gauge
interactions are characterised by a unique E6 gauge coupling g0 which is deﬁned as
g3(MX) = g2(MX) = g1(MX) = g′
1(MX) = g0 .
(34)
Also we expect that there is no mixing in the gauge kinetic part of the Lagrangian just
after the breakdown of the E6 symmetry, i.e.
g11(MX) = 0 .
(35)
The hypothesis of gauge coupling uniﬁcation (34) permits to evaluate the overall gauge
coupling g0 and the Grand Uniﬁcation scale MX using the values of g1(MZ), g2(MZ)
and g3(MZ) which are ﬁxed by LEP measurements and other experimental data [54].
The high energy scale where the uniﬁcation of the gauge couplings takes place is almost
insensitive to the matter content of the supersymmetric model. Indeed, in the one–loop
approximation we have
1
(4π)2 ln M2
X
M2
Z
=
1
β1 −β2

1
g2
1(M2
Z) −
1
g2
2(M2
Z)

.
(36)
Because the dependence of the scale MX, where U(1)Y and SU(2) gauge couplings meet,
on the particle content of any model comes from the diﬀerence of the corresponding β
functions, in which the contribution of any complete SU(5) multiplets is cancelled, the
Grand Uniﬁcation scale in the ESSM remains the same as in the MSSM, i.e in the one–
loop approximation MX ≃2 · 1016 GeV. At the same time the value of the overall gauge
coupling is rather sensitive to the matter content of SUSY models. In the ESSM the
appropriate values of the SU(2), SU(3) and U(1)Y gauge couplings at the EW scale can
be reproduced for g0 ≃1.21 which diﬀers from the value of g0 ≃0.72 found in the minimal
SUSY model. The growth of g0 in our model is caused by the extra exotic supermultiplets
of matter.
The interesting point concerning the matter content in our model is that β1, β′
1, β2
and β3 are quite close to their saturation limits when the gauge couplings blow up at the
Grand Uniﬁcation scale. The ESSM allows to accommodate only one additional pair of
19

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
5 + 5 representations of the usual SU(5) which form extra exotic quark and non–Higgs
multiplets. Further enlargement of the particle content leads to the appearance of the
Landau pole during the evolution of the gauge couplings from MZ to MX.
Using the boundary conditions (34) and (35) as well as the obtained values of g0 and
MX it is possible to solve the RG equations for g′
1 and g11. It turns out that g′
1(Q) is very
close to g1(Q) for any value of renormalisation scale Q from MX to MZ while g11(Q) is
negligibly small compared to all other gauge couplings. At the EW scale we get
g1(MZ)
g′
1(MZ) ≃0.99 ,
g11(MZ) ≃0.020 ,
g1(MZ) ≃0.46 .
(37)
Eq. (37) tells us that if the (properly normalised) gY and gN couplings start out equal
at the GUT scale, then they will remain approximately equal at low energies to within
an accuracy of two per cent at the one–loop level. As previously noted, this results from
β1 ≈β′
1 ≫β11 which implies that the eﬀect of U(1) gauge mixing is small.
In the
following analysis we shall continue to include the eﬀects of U(1) gauge mixing in the
correct way. However, it should be noted that to excellent approximation we could take
g1 = g′
1 = gY = gN and ˜Qi = QN
i , which is within the accuracy of the one–loop result.
3.4
The running of the Yukawa couplings
The running of the Yukawa couplings appearing in the superpotential in Eq. (19) obey
the following system of diﬀerential equations6:
dht
dt
=
ht
(4π)2

λ2 + 6h2
t + h2
b −16
3 g2
3 −3g2
2 −13
15g2
1 −2

˜Q2
2 + ˜Q2
Q + ˜Q2
u

g
′2
1

,
dhb
dt
=
hb
(4π)2

λ2 + h2
t + 6h2
b + h2
τ −16
3 g2
3 −3g2
2 −7
15g2
1 −2

˜Q2
1 + ˜Q2
Q + ˜Q2
d

g
′2
1

,
dhτ
dt
=
hτ
(4π)2

λ2 + 3h2
b + 4h2
τ −3g2
2 −9
5g2
1 −2

˜Q2
1 + ˜Q2
L + ˜Q2
e

g
′2
1

,
dλi
dt
=
λi
(4π)2

2λ2
i + 2Σλ + 3Σκ + (3h2
t + 3h2
b + h2
τ)δi3−
−3g2
2 −3
5g2
1 −2

˜Q2
S + ˜Q2
2 + ˜Q2
1

g
′2
1

,
dκi
dt
=
κi
(4π)2

2κ2
i + 2Σλ + 3Σκ −16
3 g2
3 −4
15g2
1 −2

˜Q2
S + ˜Q2
D + ˜Q2
D

g
′2
1

,
(38)
where Σλ = λ2
1 + λ2
2 + λ2
3 and Σκ = κ2
1 + κ2
2 + κ2
3 and where the index i = 1, 2, 3.
The couplings ht, hb and hτ in Eq. (38) determine the running masses of the fermions
of the third generation at the EW scale
mt(Mt) = ht(Mt)v
√
2
sin β, mb(Mt) = hb(Mt)v
√
2
cos β, mτ(Mt) = hτ(Mt)v
√
2
cos β ,(39)
6See also [25]–[26].
20

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
which are generated after EWSB. In Eq. (39) mτ, mt and mb are the running masses
of the τ–lepton, top– and bottom–quark respectively, Mt is a top quark pole mass,
v =
p
v2
1 + v2
2 = 246 GeV, while tan β = v2/v1, where v2 and v1 are the VEVs of the
Higgs doublets Hu and Hd. Since the running masses of the fermions of the third gen-
eration are known, Eq. (39) can be used to derive the Yukawa couplings hτ(Mt), ht(Mt)
and hb(Mt) for each particular value of tan β establishing boundary conditions for the
renormalisation group equations (38). In this paper we restrict our analysis to moderate
values of tan β ≪mt(Mt)/mb(Mt) for which b–quark and τ–lepton Yukawa couplings are
much smaller than ht and thus can be safely neglected.
The boundary conditions for the Yukawa couplings of the SM singlet ﬁeld S to the
Higgs doublets and exotic particles are unknown. These couplings give rise to the masses of
the exotic quarks and non–Higgsinos after the breakdown of gauge symmetry. Since none
of the exotic particles or Higgs bosons have been found yet λi and κi should be considered
as free parameters in our model. There are two diﬀerent assumptions regarding these
couplings that look rather natural and allow one to reduce the number of new parameters.
One of them implies that the masses of the exotic particles mimic the hierarchy observed
in the sector of ordinary quarks and charged leptons. Then non–observation of new exotic
states may be related with the considerable hierarchy of VEVs of the singlet ﬁeld S and
Higgs doublets. In this case λ1, λ2, κ1 and κ2 are tiny and can be simply ignored.
Although the suggested pattern is quite simple and natural it does not permit to tell
anything about the masses of the exotic particles of the ﬁrst two generations because the
corresponding Yukawa couplings are set to zero from the beginning. In the meantime
one has to ensure that exotic fermions gain large enough masses to avoid any conﬂict
with direct new particle searches at present and former colliders. Therefore it is worth
to incorporate all Yukawa couplings of exotic particles to the SM singlet ﬁeld S in our
analysis of RG ﬂow. Because the Yukawa interactions of extra coloured singlets Di and
Di in the superpotential (19) and as a consequence the corresponding RG equations are
symmetric with respect to the generation index i exchange, i.e. 1 ↔2, 2 ↔3 and 3 ↔1,
there is a solution of the RG equations when all κi are equal to each other. Moreover the
solutions for κi(Q) tend to converge to each other during the evolution of these couplings
from the Grand Uniﬁcation to EW scale. Thus the choice κ1(Mt) = κ2(Mt) = κ(Mt) is
well motivated by the RG ﬂow.
Similar results can be obtained for λ1 and λ2. However the running of λ1(Q) = λ2(Q)
diﬀers from the evolution of λ(Q) because the top–quark and its superpartners give sig-
niﬁcant contributions to the renormalisation of λ(Q). Nevertheless the diﬀerence between
the RG ﬂow of λ1(Q) = λ2(Q) and λ(Q) is not so appreciable in comparison with the
running of κi(Q) and ht(Q). The couplings of the Yukawa interactions involving quark
21

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
superﬁelds renormalise by virtue of the strong interactions that push their values up con-
siderably at low energies. Therefore it seems to be reasonable to ignore the diﬀerence
between the evolution of λi(Q) in ﬁrst approximation and consider separately the limit
in which λ1(Mt) = λ2(Mt) = λ(Mt).
At ﬁrst we consider the limit when the Yukawa couplings of the exotic quarks and
non–Higgses of the ﬁrst two generation are negligibly small. Then the system of the RG
equations can be rewritten in the suggestive form
8π2 d
dt
λ2
h2
t

=

3λ2 + 3κ2 −3h2
t + 16
3 g2
3 + 4
15g2
1+
+2( ˜Q2
Q + ˜Q2
u −˜Q2
S −˜Q2
1)
 λ2
h2
t

,
8π2 d
dt
κ2
h2
t

=

5κ2 + λ2 −6h2
t + 3g2
2 + 3
5g2
1+
+2( ˜Q2
2 + ˜Q2
Q + ˜Q2
u −˜Q2
S −˜Q2
D −˜Q2
D)
 κ2
h2
t

.
(40)
If we ignore gauge couplings the system of diﬀerential equations (40) has two ﬁxed points
(I)
λ2
h2
t
= 1 ,
κ2
h2
t
= 0 ;
(II)
λ2
h2
t
= 0 ,
κ2
h2
t
= 6
5 .
(41)
Of these ﬁxed points only the last one is infrared stable. The presence of the infrared
stable ﬁxed point (II) means that if we start with random boundary conditions for the
couplings λ, κ and ht in the gaugeless (g0 = 0) limit the solutions of the RG equations
(40) tend to converge towards the values which respect the ratios (II). This is illustrated
in Fig. 1a where the running λ/ht versus κ/ht for ht(MX) = 10, g0 = 0 and regular
distribution of boundary conditions for λ(MX) and κ(MX) at the Grand Uniﬁcation scale
is shown. A point in the plane λ/ht −κ/ht will ﬂow rapidly towards the valley, that
corresponds to the invariant line which connects ﬁxed points (I) and (II), and then more
slowly along it to the stable ﬁxed point (II). The properties of invariant lines and surfaces
were reviewed in detail in [55].
So far we have neglected the eﬀects of gauge couplings. However their role is quite
important especially at low energies where the gauge coupling of the strong interactions is
larger than the Yukawa ones. As one can see from Fig. 1b the inclusion of gauge couplings
spoils the valley along which the solutions of RG equations ﬂow to the ﬁxed points (II).
But the convergence of ht(Q), λ(Q) and κ(Q) to the quasi–ﬁxed point, which becomes
more close to unity, increases.
22

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Similar analysis can be performed in the case when all Yukawa couplings of exotic
particles have non–zero values. As before in the gaugeless limit there is only one stable
ﬁxed point of the RG equations (38) which corresponds to
λ2
h2
t
= 0 ,
κ2
h2
t
= κ2
1, 2
h2
t
= λ2
1, 2
h2
t
= 2
5 .
(42)
Turning the gauge couplings on induces a certain hierarchy between the Yukawa couplings
of exotic quarks and non–Higgses. Due to the growth of the gauge coupling of strong
interactions at low energies the Yukawa couplings of the top– and exotic quarks tend to
dominate over λi. It shifts the position of the quasi–ﬁxed point where the solutions of the
RG equations are focused
λ2
h2
t
→0 ,
λ2
1, 2
h2
t
≃0.26 ,
κ2
h2
t
= κ2
1, 2
h2
t
≃0.66 .
(43)
In spite of their attractiveness ﬁxed points cannot provide a complete description of
the RG ﬂow of Yukawa couplings. Indeed, the strength of the attraction of the solutions to
the RG equations (41) towards the invariant line and ﬁxed point is governed by ht(MX).
The larger ht(MX) the faster the stable ﬁxed point is reached. However at small values
of ht(MX) = 0.2 −0.4 the convergence of ht(Q), λ(Q) and κ(Q) to the ﬁxed points is
extremely weak. Therefore even at moderate values of tan β = 1.5 −3 the values of the
Yukawa couplings at the EW scale may be far away from the stable ﬁxed point.
In this context it is worth to study the limits on the values of the Yukawa couplings
imposed by the perturbative RG ﬂow. The growth of Yukawa couplings at the EW scale
entails the increase of their values at the Grand Uniﬁcation scale resulting in the appear-
ance of the Landau pole. Large values of the Yukawa couplings spoil the applicability of
perturbation theory at high energies so that the one–loop RG equations cannot be used
for an adequate description of the evolution of gauge and Yukawa couplings at high scales
Q ∼MX. The requirement of validity of perturbation theory up to the Grand Uniﬁcation
scale restricts the interval of variations of Yukawa couplings at the EW scale. In the
simplest case when κ1 = κ2 = λ1 = λ2 = 0 the assumption that perturbative physics
continues up to the scale MX sets an upper limit on the low energy value of κ(Mt),
evaluated at the top mass Mt, for each ﬁxed set of λ(Mt) and ht(Mt) (or tan β). With
decreasing (increasing) λ(Mt) the maximal possible value of κ(Mt), which is consistent
with perturbative gauge coupling uniﬁcation, increases (decreases) forming a demarcating
line that restricts the allowed range of the parameter space in the κ/ht −λ/ht plane for
each particular value of tan β.
For tan β = 2 the corresponding limits on the low energy Yukawa couplings evaluated
at Mt are shown in Fig. 2a. Outside the permitted region the solutions of the RG equations
blow up before the Grand Uniﬁcation scale and perturbation theory is not valid at high
23

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
energies. The allowed range for the Yukawa couplings varies when tan β changes. When
tan β tends to its lower bound caused by the applicability of perturbation theory, which
is around unity in our model, the permitted part of the parameter space narrows in the
direction of λ/ht so that only a small interval of variations of λ/ht is allowed. At large
tan β the allowed range for the Yukawa couplings enlarges. The typical pattern of the
RG ﬂow of the ratios of Yukawa couplings from the permitted region of the parameter
space is presented in Fig. 2b. It diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the analogous pattern obtained
in the top–bottom approach (see Fig. 1) because the chosen value of top–quark Yukawa
coupling, which corresponds to tan β = 2, is quite far from the quasi–ﬁxed point. The
peculiar feature of both patterns is that the ratio of λ/ht changes during the evolution
more strongly than κ/ht. Owing to this most trajectories in Fig. 2b are almost parallel
to the axis λ/ht.
A similar pattern for the RG ﬂow can be found for most values of tan β and does
not change much after the inclusion of the Yukawa couplings of exotic particles of the
ﬁrst two generations. But the introduction of κ1, κ2, λ1 and λ2 makes more rigorous the
restrictions on the Yukawa couplings of the third generation. In Fig. 2c we plot the allowed
range of the Yukawa couplings in the case when λ1 and λ2 are still negligibly small while
κ = κ1 = κ2. It is easy to see that in this case the upper bounds on κ/ht are more stringent
than in Fig. 2a. Turning λ1 and λ2 on so that λ(Mt) = λ1(Mt) = λ2(Mt) reduces the
limit on λ/ht (see Fig. 2d). The narrowing of the allowed range of the parameter space
is not an unexpected eﬀect.
New Yukawa couplings appear in the right–hand side of
the diﬀerential equations (38) with positive sign. As a consequence they increase the
growth of the Yukawa couplings of the third generation and perturbation theory becomes
inapplicable for lower values of λ(Mt) and κ(Mt).
Because the allowed range of the Yukawa couplings always shrinks when additional
Yukawa couplings are introduced one can ﬁnd an absolute upper limit on the value of
λ(Mt) as function of ht(Mt) or tan β by setting all other Yukawa couplings to zero. The
dependence of this upper limit λmax on tan β is shown in Fig. 3. The upper bound on λ(Mt)
grows with increasing tan β because the top–quark Yukawa coupling decreases. The value
of λmax vanishes at tan β ≃1 when the top–quark Yukawa coupling attains a ﬁxed point
(see also Fig. 1b). At large tan β the upper bound on λ(Mt) approaches the saturation
limit where λmax ≃0.84. The restrictions on λ(Mt) and other Yukawa couplings obtained
in this section are extremely useful for the analysis of the Higgs particle spectrum which
we are going to consider next.
24

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
4.
Electroweak symmetry breaking and Higgs sector
4.1
The Higgs potential and its minimisation
The sector responsible for EWSB in the ESSM includes two Higgs doublets Hu and Hd
as well as the SM singlet ﬁeld S.
The interactions between them are deﬁned by the
structure of the gauge interactions and by the superpotential in Eq. (19). Including soft
SUSY breaking terms, and radiative corrections, the resulting Higgs eﬀective potential is
the sum of four pieces:
V
=
VF + VD + Vsoft + ∆V ,
VF
=
λ2|S|2(|Hd|2 + |Hu|2) + λ2|(HdHu)|2 ,
VD
=
g2
2
8

H†
dσaHd + H†
uσaHu
2
+ g′2
8
 |Hd|2 −|Hu|22 +
+g
′2
1
2

˜Q1|Hd|2 + ˜Q2|Hu|2 + ˜QS|S|22
,
Vsoft
=
m2
S|S|2 + m2
1|Hd|2 + m2
2|Hu|2 +

λAλS(HuHd) + h.c.

,
(44)
where g′ =
p
3/5g1 is the low energy (non-GUT normalised) gauge coupling and ˜Q1, ˜Q2
and ˜QS are eﬀective U(1)N charges of Hd, Hu and S respectively. Here HT
d = (H0
d, H−
d ),
HT
u = (H+
u , H0
u) and (HdHu) = H+
u H−
d −H0
uH0
d. At tree–level the Higgs potential in
Eq. (44) is described by the sum of the ﬁrst three terms. The structure of the F–terms VF
is exactly the same as in the NMSSM without the self–interaction of the singlet superﬁeld.
However the D–terms in VD contain a new ingredient: the terms in the expression for VD
proportional to g′
1
2 represent D–term contributions due to the extra U(1)N which are not
present in the MSSM or NMSSM. The soft SUSY breaking terms are collected in Vsoft.
The term ∆V represents the contribution of loop corrections to the Higgs eﬀective
potential. In the MSSM the dominant contribution to ∆V comes from the loops involving
the top–quark and its superpartners because of their large Yukawa coupling. However the
ESSM contains many new exotic supermultiplets and the RG analysis described in the
previous section revealed that the Yukawa couplings of the exotic D–quarks to the SM
singlet ﬁeld S can be large at the EW scale. Therefore the contribution of D–quarks
and their superpartners to ∆V can be enhanced as well. Keeping only leading one–loop
corrections to the Higgs eﬀective potential in Eq. (44) from the top– and exotic quarks
and their superpartners we ﬁnd
∆V =
3
32π2
"
m4
˜t1
 
ln
m2
˜t1
Q2 −3
2
!
+ m4
˜t2
 
ln
m2
˜t2
Q2 −3
2
!
−2m4
t

ln m2
t
Q2 −3
2

+
(45)
25

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
+ P
i=1,2,3
(
m4
˜D1,i
 
ln
m2
˜D1,i
Q2
−3
2
!
+ m4
˜D2,i
 
ln
m2
˜D2,i
Q2
−3
2
!
−2µ4
Di

ln µ2
Di
Q2 −3
2
)#
,
where µDi = κi < S >= κis
√
2 are masses of exotic quarks, while m˜t1, m˜t2, m ˜D1,i and m ˜D2,i
are the masses of the superpartners of the top and D–quarks which are given by
m2
˜t1,˜t2 = 1
2

m2
Q + m2
U + 2 + 2m2
t ±
s
(m2
Q −m2
U)2 + 4m2
t

At −
λs
√
2 tan β
2
,
m2
˜D1,i, ˜D2,i = 1
2

m2
Di + m2
Di + 2µ2
Di ±
s
(m2
Di −m2
Di)2 + 4

AκiµDi −κiλ
2 v1v2
2
.
(46)
The couplings g2, g′, g′
1 and λ in the scalar potential (44) do not violate SUSY. More-
over the gauge couplings g2 and g′ are well known [54]. The value of the extra U(1)N
coupling g′
1 and the eﬀective U(1)N charges of Hd, Hu and S can be determined assuming
gauge coupling uniﬁcation (see Eq. (37)). The Yukawa coupling λ cannot be ﬁxed as di-
rectly as the gauge couplings. But as we discussed in the previous section the requirement
of validity of perturbation theory up to the GUT scale leads to an upper bound λ ≤λmax.
A set of soft SUSY breaking parameters in the tree–level Higgs boson potential includes
the soft masses m2
1, m2
2, m2
S and the trilinear coupling Aλ. The part of the scalar potential
(44) which contains soft SUSY breaking terms Vsoft coincides with the corresponding one
in the NMSSM when the NMSSM parameters κ and Aκ vanish. Since the only complex
phase (of λAλ) that appears in the tree–level scalar potential (44) can easily be absorbed
by a suitable redeﬁnition of the Higgs ﬁelds, CP–invariance is preserved in the Higgs
sector of the considered model at tree–level. The inclusion of loop corrections draws into
the analysis many other soft SUSY breaking parameters which deﬁne masses of diﬀerent
superparticles. Some of these parameters can be complex creating potential sources of
CP–violation.
At the physical minimum of the scalar potential (44) the Higgs ﬁelds develop VEVs
< Hd >= 1
√
2
 
v1
0
!
,
< Hu >= 1
√
2
 
0
v2
!
,
< S >=
s
√
2.
(47)
The vacuum conﬁguration (47) is not the most general one. Because of the SU(2) invari-
ance of the Higgs potential (44) one can always make < H+
u >= 0 by virtue of a suitable
gauge rotation. Then the requirement < H−
d >= 0, which is a necessary condition to
preserve U(1)em associated with electromagnetism in the physical vacuum, is equivalent
to requiring the squared mass of the physical charged scalar to be positive. It imposes
additional constraints on the parameter space of the model.
26

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
The equations for the extrema of the Higgs boson potential in the directions (47) in
ﬁeld space read:
∂V
∂s
=
m2
Ss −λAλ
√
2 v1v2 + λ2
2 (v2
1 + v2
2)s+
+g
′2
1
2

˜Q1v2
1 + ˜Q2v2
2 + ˜QSs2

˜QSs + ∂∆V
∂s
= 0 ,
∂V
∂v1
=
m2
1v1 −λAλ
√
2
sv2 + λ2
2 (v2
2 + s2)v1 + ¯g2
8

v2
1 −v2
2)

v1+
+g
′2
1
2

˜Q1v2
1 + ˜Q2v2
2 + ˜QSs2

˜Q1v1 + ∂∆V
∂v1
= 0 ,
∂V
∂v2
=
m2
2v2 −λAλ
√
2 sv1 + λ2
2 (v2
1 + s2)v2 + ¯g2
8

v2
2 −v2
1

v2+
+g
′2
1
2

˜Q1v2
1 + ˜Q2v2
2 + ˜QSs2

˜Q2v2 + ∂∆V
∂v2
= 0 ,
(48)
where ¯g =
p
g2
2 + g′2. Instead of v1 and v2 it is more convenient to use tan β and v
deﬁned above.
To simplify the analysis of the Higgs spectrum it is worth to express
the soft masses m2
1, m2
2, m2
S in terms of s, v, tan β and other parameters. Because from
precision measurements we know that v = 246 GeV the tree–level Higgs masses and
couplings depend on four variables only:
λ ,
s ,
tan β ,
Aλ .
(49)
4.2
Z-Z′ mixing
Initially the sector of EWSB involves ten degrees of freedom. However four of them are
massless Goldstone modes which are swallowed by the W ±, Z and Z′ gauge bosons. The
charged W ± bosons gain masses via the interaction with the neutral components of the
Higgs doublets just in the same way as in the MSSM so that MW = g2
2 v. Meanwhile the
mechanism of the neutral gauge boson mass generation diﬀers signiﬁcantly. Letting Z′ be
the gauge boson associated with U(1)N, i.e.
Z′
µ = B2µ ,
Zµ = W 3
µ cos θW −B1µ sin θW ,
(50)
the Z −Z′ mass squared matrix is given by
M2
ZZ′ =

M2
Z
∆2
∆2
M2
Z′

,
(51)
where
M2
Z = ¯g2
4 v2 ,
∆2 = ¯gg′
1
2 v2

˜Q1 cos2 β −˜Q2 sin2 β

,
M2
Z′ = g
′2
1 v2

˜Q2
1 cos2 β + ˜Q2
2 sin2 β

+ g
′2
1 ˜Q2
Ss2 .
(52)
27

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
The eigenvalues of this matrix are
M2
Z1, Z2 = 1
2

M2
Z + M2
Z′ ∓
q
(M2
Z −M2
Z′)2 + 4∆4

.
(53)
The eigenvalues M2
Z1 and M2
Z2 correspond to the mass eigenstates Z1 and Z2 which are
linear superpositions of Z and Z′
Z1 = Z cos αZZ′ + Z′ sin αZZ′ ,
Z2 = −Z sin αZZ′ + Z′ cos αZZ′ ,
αZZ′ = 1
2 arctan

2∆2
M2
Z′ −M2
Z

.
(54)
Phenomenological constraints typically require the mixing angle αZZ′ to be less than
2 −3 × 10−3 [56] and the mass of the extra neutral gauge boson to be heavier than
500 −600 GeV [57]. A suitable mass hierarchy and mixing between Z and Z′ are main-
tained if the ﬁeld S acquires a large VEV s ≳1.5 TeV. Then the mass of the lightest
neutral gauge boson Z1 is very close to MZ whereas the mass of Z2 is set by the VEV of
the singlet ﬁeld MZ2 ≃MZ′ ≈g′
1 ˜QS s.
4.3
Charged Higgs
Due to electric–charge conservation the charged components of the Higgs doublets are not
mixed with neutral Higgs ﬁelds. They form a separate sector whose spectrum is described
by a 2 × 2 mass matrix. Its determinant has zero value leading to the appearance of two
Goldstone states
G−= H−
d cos β −H+∗
u sin β ,
(55)
which are absorbed into the longitudinal degrees of freedom of the W ± gauge boson.
Their orthogonal linear combination
H+ = H−∗
d
sin β + H+
u cos β
(56)
gains mass
m2
H± =
√
2λAλ
sin 2β s −λ2
2 v2 + g2
2 v2 + ∆± .
(57)
In the leading one–loop approximation the corrections to the charged Higgs boson mass
∆± in the ESSM are almost the same as in the MSSM where the parameter µ has to be
replaced by λs
√
2. The explicit expressions for the leading one–loop corrections to m2
H± in
the MSSM can be found in [58].
28

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
4.4
CP–odd Higgs
The imaginary parts of the neutral components of the Higgs doublets and imaginary
part of the SM singlet ﬁeld S compose the CP–odd (or pseudoscalar) Higgs sector of the
considered model. This sector includes two Goldstone modes G0, G′ which are swallowed
by the Z and Z′ bosons after EWSB, leaving only one physical CP–odd Higgs state A.
In the ﬁeld basis (A, G′, G0) one has
A = PS sin ϕ + P cos ϕ ,
G′ = PS cos ϕ −P sin ϕ ,
G0 =
√
2(Im H0
d cos β −Im H0
u sin β) ,
(58)
where
P =
√
2(Im H0
d sin β + Im H0
u cos β) ,
PS =
√
2Im S ,
tan ϕ = v
2s sin 2β.
(59)
Two massless pseudoscalars G0 and G′ decouple from the rest of the spectrum whereas
the physical CP–odd Higgs boson A acquires mass
m2
A =
√
2λAλ
sin 2ϕ v + ∆A ,
(60)
where ∆A is the contribution of loop corrections. In the leading one–loop approxima-
tion the expressions for the mass of the pseudoscalar Higgs boson in the ESSM and PQ
symmetric NMSSM coincide. The CP–odd Higgs sector of the NMSSM and one–loop
corrections to it were studied in [59]. In phenomenologically acceptable models, in which
the singlet VEV is much larger than v, ϕ goes to zero and the physical pseudoscalar is
predominantly the superposition of the imaginary parts of the neutral components of the
Higgs doublets, i.e. P.
4.5
CP–even Higgs
The CP–even Higgs sector involves Re H0
d, Re H0
u and Re S.
In the ﬁeld space basis
(h, H, N) rotated by an angle β with respect to the initial one
Re H0
d = (h cos β −H sin β + v1)/
√
2 ,
Re H0
u = (h sin β + H cos β + v2)/
√
2 ,
Re S = (s + N)/
√
2 ,
(61)
29

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
the mass matrix of the Higgs scalars takes the form [60]:
M2 =









∂2V
∂v2
1
v
∂2V
∂v∂β
∂2V
∂v∂s
1
v
∂2V
∂v∂β
1
v2
∂2V
∂2β
1
v
∂2V
∂s∂β
∂2V
∂v∂s
1
v
∂2V
∂s∂β
∂2V
∂2s









=




M2
11
M2
12
M2
13
M2
21
M2
22
M2
23
M2
31
M2
32
M2
33



.
(62)
Taking second derivatives of the Higgs boson eﬀective potential and substituting m2
1, m2
2,
m2
S from the minimisation conditions (48) one obtains:
M2
11
=
λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + ¯g2
4 v2 cos2 2β + g
′2
1 v2( ˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β)2 + ∆11 ,
M2
12
=
M2
21 =
λ2
4 −¯g2
8

v2 sin 4β + g
′2
1
2 v2( ˜Q2 −˜Q1)×
×( ˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β) sin 2β + ∆12 ,
M2
22
=
√
2λAλ
sin 2β s +
¯g2
4 −λ2
2

v2 sin2 2β + g
′2
1
4 ( ˜Q2 −˜Q1)2v2 sin2 2β + ∆22 ,
M2
23
=
M2
32 = −λAλ
√
2 v cos 2β + g
′2
1
2 ( ˜Q2 −˜Q1) ˜QSvs sin 2β + ∆23 ,
M2
13
=
M2
31 = −λAλ
√
2 v sin 2β + λ2vs + g
′2
1 ( ˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β) ˜QSvs + ∆13 ,
M2
33
=
λAλ
2
√
2s
v2 sin 2β + g
′2
1 ˜Q2
Ss2 + ∆33 .
(63)
In Eq. (63) ∆ij represents the contribution of loop corrections which in the leading one–
loop approximation are rather similar to the ones calculated in the NMSSM. The one–loop
corrections to the mass matrix of the NMSSM CP–even Higgs sector were analysed in [59],
[61].
When the SUSY breaking scale MS and VEV of the singlet ﬁeld are considerably larger
than the EW scale the mass matrix (62)–(63) has a hierarchical structure. Therefore the
masses of the heaviest Higgs bosons are closely approximated by the diagonal entries M2
22
and M2
33 which are expected to be of the order of M2
S or even higher. All oﬀ–diagonal
matrix elements are relatively small ≲MSMZ. As a result the mass of one CP–even
Higgs boson (approximately given by H) is governed by mA while the mass of another
one (predominantly the N singlet ﬁeld) is set by MZ′. Since the minimal eigenvalue of
the mass matrix (62)–(63) is always less than its smallest diagonal element at least one
Higgs scalar in the CP–even sector (approximately h) remains light even when the SUSY
breaking scale tends to inﬁnity, i.e. m2
h1 ≲M2
11.
The direct Higgs searches at LEP set stringent limits on the parameter space of su-
persymmetric extensions of the SM. In order to establish the corresponding restrictions
on the parameters of the ESSM we need to specify the couplings of the neutral Higgs
30

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
particles to the Z boson. In the rotated ﬁeld basis (h, H, N) the trilinear part of the La-
grangian, which determines the interaction of the neutral Higgs states with the Z boson,
is simpliﬁed:
LAZH = ¯g
2MZZ1µZ1µh + ¯g
2Z1µ

H(∂µA) −(∂µH)A

.
(64)
Here we assume that the mixing between Z and Z′ is negligibly small and can be safely
ignored so that Z1 ≃Z. In the considered case only one CP–even component h couples
to a pair of Z bosons while another one H interacts with the pseudoscalar A and Z1. The
coupling of h to the Z1 pair is exactly the same as in the SM. In the Yukawa interactions
with fermions the ﬁrst component of the CP–even Higgs basis also manifests itself as a
SM–like Higgs boson.
The couplings of the Higgs scalars to a Z1 pair (gZZi, i = 1, 2, 3) and to the Higgs
pseudoscalar and Z boson (gZAi) appear because of the mixing of h and H with other
components of the CP–even Higgs sector. Following the traditional notations we deﬁne the
normalised R–couplings as: gZZhi = RZZi× SM coupling; gZAhi = ¯g
2RZAi. The absolute
values of all R–couplings vary from zero to unity.
The components of the CP–even Higgs basis are related to the physical CP–even Higgs
eigenstates by virtue of a unitary transformation:




h
H
N



= U†




h1
h2
h3



.
(65)
Combining the Lagrangian (64) and relations (65) the normalised R–couplings may be
written in terms of the mixing matrix elements according to
RZZi = U†
hhi ,
RZAi = U†
Hhi .
(66)
If all fundamental parameters are real the CP–even Higgs mass matrix (62)–(63) is sym-
metric and the unitary transformation (65) reduces to an orthogonal one. The orthogo-
nality of the mixing matrices U results in sum rules:
X
i
R2
ZZi = 1 ,
X
i
R2
ZAi = 1 ,
X
i
RZZiRZAi = 0 .
(67)
The conditions (67) allow to eliminate three R–couplings.
As a result, in the limit
αZZ′ →0 the interactions of the neutral Higgs particles with a Z boson are described by
three independent R–couplings. The dependence of spectrum and couplings of the Higgs
bosons on the parameters of the ESSM will be examined in the following section.
31

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
5.
Higgs phenomenology
5.1
Higgs masses and couplings
5.1.1
The MSSM limit λ →0, s →∞
First of all we consider the spectrum and couplings of the Higgs bosons in the ESSM. Let
us start from the MSSM limit of the ESSM when λ →0, s →∞with µeff ∼λs held
ﬁxed in order to give an acceptable chargino mass and EWSB. From the ﬁrst minimisation
conditions (48) it follows that such solution can be obtained for very large and negative
values of m2
S only.
As s →∞the CP–even Higgs state, which is predominantly a singlet ﬁeld, Z′ boson
and all exotic quarks and non–Higgsinos become very heavy and decouple from the rest
of the particle spectrum. Then by means of a small unitary transformation the CP–even
Higgs mass matrix in Eq. (62) reduces to the block diagonal form [62]
M′2 ≃









M2
11 −M4
13
M2
33
M2
12 −M2
13M2
32
M2
33
0
M2
21 −M2
23M2
31
M2
33
M2
22 −M4
23
M2
33
0
0
0
M2
33 + M4
13
M2
33
+ M4
23
M2
33









.
(68)
For small values of λ the top–left 2 ×2 submatrix in Eq. (68) reproduces the mass matrix
of the CP–even Higgs sector in the MSSM. So at tree–level we ﬁnd
m2
H±
≃
m2
A + m2
W ,
m2
A =
√
2λAλ
sin 2β s ,
m2
h1,h2
≃
1
2

m2
A + M2
Z ∓
q
(m2
A + M2
Z)2 −4m2
AM2
Z cos2 2β

,
m2
h3
≃
g
′2
1 ˜Q2
Ss2.
(69)
In Eq. (69) the terms of O(λ2v2) are omitted, and s2 ≫v2 is assumed.
Since the enlargement of s leads to the growth of the mass of the singlet dominated
Higgs state mh3, which is very close to MZ′, the mixing between N and neutral components
of the Higgs doublets diminishes when λ tends to zero. Thus in the MSSM limit of the
ESSM the couplings of the heaviest CP–even Higgs boson to the quarks, leptons and
gauge bosons vanish and the MSSM sum rules for the masses and couplings of the two
lightest Higgs scalars and pseudoscalar are recovered. As in the minimal SUSY model
the masses of MSSM–like Higgs bosons are deﬁned by mA and tan β. They grow if mA
increases and at large values of mA (m2
A >> M2
Z) the mass of the lightest CP–even Higgs
boson attains its theoretical upper bound which is determined by the Z boson mass at
tree–level, i.e. mh1 ≤MZ| cos 2β| [63].
32

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
5.1.2
λ ≳g1
When λ ≳g′
1 ≈g1 ≈0.46 the qualitative pattern of the spectrum of the Higgs bosons
is rather similar to the one which arises in the PQ symmetric NMSSM [62], [64]. We
ﬁrst give an analytic discussion of the spectrum at tree–level, then discuss the spectrum
numerically including one–loop radiative corrections.
Assuming that in the allowed part of the parameter space M2
22 ≫M2
33 ≫M2
11 the
perturbation theory method yields
m2
h3
≃
M2
22 + M4
23
M2
22
,
m2
h2
≃
M2
33 −M4
23
M2
22
+ M4
13
M2
33
,
m2
h1
≃
M2
11 −M4
13
M2
33
.
(70)
Here we neglect all terms suppressed by inverse powers of m2
A or M2
Z′, i.e. O(M4
Z/m2
A)
and O(M4
Z/M2
Z′).
At tree–level the masses of the Higgs bosons can written as
m2
A
=
2λ2s2x
sin2 2β + O(M2
Z) ,
m2
H±
=
m2
A + O(M2
Z) ,
m2
h3
=
m2
A + O(M2
Z) ,
m2
h2
=
g
′2
1 ˜Q2
Ss2 + O(M2
Z) ,
(71)
m2
h1
≃
λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + ¯g2
4 v2 cos2 2β + g
′2
1 v2

˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β
2
−
−λ4v2
g
′2
1 Q2
S

1 −x + g
′2
1
λ2

˜Q1 cos2 β + Q2 sin2 β

QS
2
+ O(M4
Z/M2
Z′) ,
(72)
where
x =
Aλ
√
2λs sin 2β .
As evident from the explicit expression for m2
h1 given above at λ2 ≫g2
1 the last term in
Eq. (72) dominates and the mass of the lightest Higgs boson tends to be negative if the
auxiliary variable x is not close to unity. In this case the vacuum stability requirement
constrains the variable x around unity. As a consequence mA is conﬁned in the vicinity of
µ tan β and is much larger than the masses of the Z′ and lightest CP–even Higgs boson.
At so large values of mA the masses of the heaviest CP–even, CP–odd and charged states
are almost degenerate around mA.
In Fig. 4 we plot masses and couplings of the Higgs bosons as a function of mA. As
a representative example we ﬁx tan β = 2 and VEV of the singlet ﬁeld s = 1.9 TeV,
that corresponds to MZ′ ≃700 GeV which is quite close to the current limit on the Z′
boson mass.
For our numerical study we also choose the maximum possible value of
33

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
λ(Mt) ≃0.794 which does not spoil the validity of perturbation theory up to the Grand
Uniﬁcation scale. In order to obtain a realistic spectrum, we include the leading one–
loop corrections from the top and stop loops.
The contributions of these corrections
to m2
A, m2
H± and mass matrix of the CP–even Higgs states (62)–(63) depend rather
strongly on the soft masses of the the superpartners of the top–quark (m2
Q and m2
U)
and the stop mixing parameter Xt = At −
λs
√
2 tan β . Here and in the following we set
mQ = mU = MS = 700 GeV while the stop mixing parameter is taken to be
√
6 MS in
order to enhance stop–radiative eﬀects.
From Fig. 4a it becomes clear that the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar changes
considerably when mA varies. At mA below 2 TeV or above 3 TeV the mass squared of
the lightest Higgs boson tends to be negative. A negative eigenvalue of the mass matrix
(62)–(63) means that the considered vacuum conﬁguration ceases to be a minimum and
turns into a saddle point. Near this point there is a direction in ﬁeld space along which the
energy density decreases generating instability of the given vacuum conﬁguration. The
requirement of stability of the physical vacuum therefore limits the range of variations of
mA from below and above. Together with the experimental lower limit on the mass of
the Z′ boson it maintains the mass hierarchy in the spectrum of the Higgs particles seen
in Figs. 4b and 4c. Relying on this mass hierarchy one can diagonalise the 3 × 3 mass
matrix of the CP–even Higgs sector.
The numerical results in Figs. 4a–4c conﬁrm the analytic tree–level results discussed
earlier.
The numerical analysis reveals that the masses of the two heaviest CP–even,
CP–odd and charged Higgs states grow when the VEV of the SM singlet ﬁeld (or MZ′)
increases. The masses of the heaviest scalar, pseudoscalar and charged Higgs ﬁelds also
rise with increasing λ, mA and tan β while the mass of the second lightest Higgs scalar is
almost insensitive to variations of these parameters. The growth of the masses of heavy
Higgs bosons caused by the increase of tan β or s does not aﬀect much the lightest Higgs
scalar mass which lies below 200 GeV (see Fig. 4a).
Turning now to a discussion of the couplings, the hierarchical structure of the mass
matrix of the CP–even Higgs sector for λ ≳g1 allows one to get approximate solutions
for the Higgs couplings to the Z boson. They are given by
|RZZ1| ≃1 −1
2
M2
13
M2
33
2
,
|RZZ2| ≃|M2
13|
M2
33
,
|RZZ3| ≃|M2
12|
M2
11
,
|RZA1| ≃

M2
12
M2
22
−M2
23M2
13
M2
22M2
33
 ,
|RZA2| ≃|M2
23|
M2
22
,
|RZA3| ≃1 −1
2
M2
13
M2
33
2
.
(73)
The obtained approximate formulae for the Higgs couplings (73) indicate that
RZZ1 ≫RZZ2 ≫RZZ3 and RZA3 ≫RZA2 ≫RZA1.
The analytic discussion of the couplings is conﬁrmed by the numerical results for
34

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
RZZi and RZAi shown in Figs. 4d and 4e where the results of our numerical analysis
including leading one–loop corrections to the CP–even Higgs mass matrix from the top–
quark and its superpartners are presented. From Eq. (73) as well as from Figs. 4d and
4e one can see that the couplings of the second lightest Higgs boson to a Z pair and
to the Higgs pseudoscalar and Z are always suppressed. They are of O(MZ/MZ′) and
O(MZ/mA) respectively which is a manifestation of the singlet dominated structure of
the wave function of the second lightest Higgs scalar. The heaviest CP–even Higgs boson
is predominantly a superposition of neutral components of Higgs doublets H. This is
a reason why its relative coupling to the pseudoscalar and Z is so close to unity (see
Eq. (64)). The main contribution to the wave function of the lightest Higgs scalar gives
the ﬁrst component of the CP–even Higgs basis h. Due to this the relative coupling of
the lightest CP–even Higgs boson to Z pairs tends to unity in the permitted range of
the parameter space. Because mixing between H and h is extremely small the couplings
RZZ3 and RZA1 are almost negligible, i.e. they are of O(M2
Z/m2
A).
5.1.3
λ ≲g1
With decreasing λ the qualitative pattern of the Higgs spectrum changes signiﬁcantly.
In Fig. 5 the masses of the Higgs particles and their couplings to Z are examined as a
function of mA for λ(Mt) = 0.3. The values of tan β and MZ′ are taken to be the same
as in Fig. 4. For λ ≲g′
1 ≈g1 ≈0.46 the allowed range of mA enlarges because mixing
between the ﬁrst and third components of the CP–even Higgs basis reduces. In particular
the mass squared of the lightest Higgs boson remains positive even when mA ∼MZ, as
shown in Fig. 5a. Therefore the lower bound on the Higgs pseudoscalar mass disappears
so that charged, CP–odd and second lightest CP–even Higgs states may have masses in
the 200 −300 GeV range (see Figs. 5b and 5c). But the requirement of vacuum stability
still prevents having very high values of mA (or x). Indeed from Eq. (72) it is obvious
that very large values of x (or mA) pulls the mass squared of the lightest Higgs boson
below zero destabilising the vacuum. This sets upper limits on the masses of charged and
pseudoscalar Higgs bosons.
At least one scalar in the Higgs spectrum is always heavy since it has almost the same
mass as the Z′ boson, which must be heavier than 600 GeV. The mass of this CP–even
Higgs state is determined by the VEV of the singlet ﬁeld and does not change much if
the other parameters λ, tan β and mA vary. As before the masses of the other CP–even,
CP–odd and charged Higgs ﬁelds grow when mA rises providing the degeneracy of the
corresponding states at mA ≫MZ. The growth of tan β and s enlarges the allowed range
of mA increasing the upper limit on the pseudoscalar mass. The permitted interval for
mA is also expanded when λ diminishes.
35

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
The couplings of the neutral Higgs bosons to Z depend rather strongly on the value
of the pseudoscalar mass. At small values of mA the second lightest Higgs scalar gains
a relatively low mass. Because of this the mixing between H and h is large and relative
couplings of the lightest Higgs scalars to Z pairs and to the pseudoscalar and Z are of the
order of unity (see Figs. 5d and 5e). The couplings of the heaviest CP–even Higgs state
to other bosons and fermions are tiny in this case since it is predominantly a singlet ﬁeld.
If the lightest Higgs scalar and pseudoscalar had low masses and large couplings to the
Z they could be produced at LEPII. Non–observation of these particles at LEP rules out
most parts of the ESSM parameter space for mA ≲200 GeV.
When mA is much larger than MZ but is less than MZ′ the heaviest Higgs scalar state
is still singlet dominated which makes its couplings to the observed particles negligibly
small. The hierarchical structure of the CP–even Higgs mass matrix ensures that the
lightest and second lightest Higgs scalars are predominantly composed of the ﬁrst and
second components of the CP–even Higgs basis respectively. Therefore RZZ1 and RZA2
are very close to unity while RZZ2 and RZA1 are suppressed. When mA approaches the Z′
boson mass the mixing between S and H becomes large. This leads to appreciable values
of the RZA2 and RZA3 couplings as displayed in Fig. 5e. However both of these relative
couplings may be simultaneously large only in a very narrow part of the parameter space
where mA ≃MZ′. At the same time the relative couplings of the heaviest Higgs scalars
to Z pairs are still much less than unity in this range of parameters because the mixing
between the ﬁrst and the other components of the CP–even Higgs basis remains very
small (see Fig. 5d). Further increasing mA mimics the mass hierarchy of the CP–even
Higgs sector appeared at λ ≳g1. As a result the pattern of the Higgs couplings is rather
similar to the one shown in Figs. 4d and 4e.
5.2
Upper bound on the lightest CP–even Higgs boson mass
It is apparent from Figs. 4b and 5b, as well as our analytic considerations, that at some
value of mA (or x) the lightest CP–even Higgs boson mass attains its maximum value.
This coincides with the theoretical upper bound on mh1 given by the ﬁrst element of the
mass
p
M2
11. In this subsection we shall obtain an absolute upper bound on the lightest
CP–even Higgs boson mass in the ESSM, and compare it to similar bounds obtained in
the MSSM and NMSSM.
5.2.1
Tree–level upper bound
At tree–level the lightest Higgs scalar mass is obtained from Eq. (72) where the ﬁrst
three terms on the right–hand side are positive deﬁnite, while the fourth term is always
36

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
negative, and the upper bound therefore corresponds to taking this term to be zero.
The contribution of the extra U(1)N D–term to the upper limit on mh1 may be closely
approximated as
g
′2
1 v2

˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β
2
≃
MZ
2
2 
1 + 1
4 cos 2β
2
.
(74)
Using this approximation, the tree–level upper bound on the lightest CP–even Higgs
boson is given by:
m2
h1 ≲λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + M2
Z cos2 2β + M2
Z
4

1 + 1
4 cos 2β
2
.
(75)
The ﬁrst and second terms are similar to the tree–level terms in the NMSSM [14]. The
extra U(1)N eﬀect appears through the third term in Eq. (72) which is a contribution
coming from the additional U(1)N D–term in the Higgs scalar potential [65].
At tree–level the theoretical restriction on the lightest Higgs mass in the ESSM de-
pends on λ and tan β only. As it was noticed in section 3 the requirement of validity of
perturbation theory up to the Grand Uniﬁcation scale constrains the interval of variations
of the Yukawa coupling λ for each value of tan β. The allowed range of λ as a function of
tan β was shown in Fig. 3. Using the results of the analysis of the RG ﬂow in the ESSM
one can obtain the maximum possible value of the lightest Higgs scalar for each particular
choice of tan β.
In Fig. 6a we plot maximum values of the square roots of diﬀerent contributions in
Eq. (75) to the tree–level upper limit on m2
h1 versus tan β. It is clear that at moderate
values of tan β ∼1 −3 the term λ2v2/2 sin2 2β from the F-term involving the singlet ﬁeld
dominates. With increasing tan β it falls quite rapidly and becomes negligibly small as
tan β ≳15. In contrast the contribution of the SU(2) and U(1)Y D–terms grows when
tan β becomes larger. At tan β ≳4 it exceeds λ2v2/2 sin2 2β and gives the dominant
contribution to the tree–level upper bound on mh1. As one can see from Fig. 6a the D–
term of the extra U(1)N gives the second largest contribution to the tree–level theoretical
restriction on mh1 at very large and low values of tan β, when tan β is less than 1.6 or
larger than 8. In the part of the ESSM parameter space where the upper limit on mh1
reaches its absolute maximum value its contribution is the smallest one. According to
Eq. (75) the square root of the U(1)N D–term contribution to m2
h1 varies from 45 to
34 GeV when tan β changes from 1.1 to 14.
The resulting tree–level upper bound on the mass of the lightest Higgs particle in
the ESSM is presented in Fig. 6b, and compared to the corresponding bounds in the
MSSM and NMSSM. In the ESSM the bound attains a maximum value of 130 GeV at
tan β = 1.5 −1.8. Remarkably, we ﬁnd that in the interval of tan β from 1.2 to 3.4 the
absolute maximum value of the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar in the ESSM is larger than
37

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
the experimental lower limit on the SM–like Higgs boson even at tree–level. Therefore
non–observation of the Higgs boson at LEP does not cause any trouble for the ESSM,
even at tree–level.
The upper bound on the mass of the lightest CP–even Higgs scalar in the NMSSM
exceeds the corresponding limit in the MSSM because of the extra contribution to m2
h1
induced by the additional F–term in the Higgs scalar potential of the NMSSM. The size
of this contribution, which is described by the ﬁrst term in Eq. (75), is determined by
the Yukawa coupling λ whose interval of variations is constrained by the applicability of
perturbation theory at high energies. The upper limit on the coupling λ caused by the
validity of perturbation theory in the NMSSM is more stringent than in the ESSM due to
the presence of exotic 5 + 5–plets of matter in the particle spectrum of the ESSM. Indeed
extra SU(5) multiplets of matter change the running of the gauge couplings so that their
values at the intermediate scale rise when the number of new supermultiplets increases.
Since gi(Q) occurs in the right–hand side of the diﬀerential equations (38) with negative
sign the growth of the gauge couplings prevents the appearance of the Landau pole in
the evolution of the Yukawa couplings. It means that for each value of the top–quark
Yukawa coupling (or tan β) at the EW scale the maximum allowed value of λ(Mt) rises
when the number of 5 + 5–plets increases. The increase of λ(Mt) is accompanied by the
growth of the theoretical restriction on the mass of the lightest CP–even Higgs particle.
For instance, it was shown that the introduction of four pairs of 5 + 5 supermultiplets
in the NMSSM raised the two–loop upper limit on the lightest Higgs boson mass from
135 GeV to 155 GeV [66]. This is also a reason why the tree–level theoretical restriction
on mh1 in the Next-to-Minimal SUSY model is considerably less than in the ESSM at
moderate values of tan β.
At large tan β ≫10 the contribution of the F–term of the SM singlet ﬁeld to m2
h1
vanishes. Therefore with increasing tan β the upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson
mass in the NMSSM approaches the corresponding limit in the minimal SUSY model.
In the ESSM the theoretical restriction on the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar also
diminishes when tan β rises. But even at very large values of tan β the tree–level upper
limit on mh1 in the ESSM is still 6−7 GeV larger than the ones in the MSSM and NMSSM
because of the U(1)N D–term contribution.
5.2.2
One–loop upper bound
So far we have discussed the bounds at tree–level. Now we shall include radiative correc-
tions in our discussion. It is well known that the inclusion of loop corrections from the
top–quark and its superpartners increases the bound on the lightest Higgs boson mass in
the ESSM substantially. In the ESSM and in the NMSSM these corrections are nearly the
38

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
same as in the MSSM. The leading one–loop and two–loop corrections to the lightest Higgs
boson mass in the MSSM were calculated and studied in [67] and [68]–[69] respectively.
However, in contrast with the MSSM and NMSSM, the ESSM contains extra supermul-
tiplets of exotic matter. Because it is not clear a priori if the corrections induced by
the loops involving new particles aﬀect the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar considerably,
we include in our analysis leading one–loop corrections to m2
h1 from the exotic quarks
since their couplings to the singlet Higgs ﬁeld tend to be large at low energies enhancing
radiative eﬀects. In the leading approximation the upper bound on the lightest Higgs
boson mass in the ESSM can be written as
m2
h1 ≲λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + M2
Z cos2 2β + M2
Z
4

1 + 1
4 cos 2β
2
+ ∆t
11 + ∆D
11 ,
(76)
where the third term represents the U(1)N D–term contribution while ∆t
11 and ∆D
11 are
one–loop corrections from the top–quark and D–quark supermultiplets respectively. When
m2
Di = m2
Di = M2
S the contribution of one–loop corrections to m2
h1 from the superpartners
of D–quarks reduces to
∆D
11 =
X
i=1,2,3
3λ2κ2
i v2
32π2
sin2 2β ln
mD1,imD2,i
Q2

.
(77)
In Figs. 7a and 7b we explore the dependence of one–loop upper bound on the lightest
Higgs boson mass on the Yukawa couplings κi and λ. We consider two diﬀerent cases
when κ1 = κ2 = 0, κ3 = κ (see Fig. 7a) and κ1 = κ2 = κ3 = κ (see Fig. 7b). To simplify
our analysis the soft masses of the superpartners of exotic and top–quarks are set to be
equal, i.e. m2
Q = m2
U = m2
Di = m2
Di = M2
S. In order to enhance the contribution of loop
eﬀects we assume maximal mixing in the stop sector (Xt =
√
6MS) and minimal mixing
between the superpartners of exotic quarks D and D, i.e. Aκi = 0. As before we keep
MS = MZ′ = 700 GeV and tan β = 2. Then the theoretical restriction on the mass of the
lightest Higgs scalar (76) is deﬁned by the couplings λ and κ only.
In the plane λ/ht −κ/ht the set of points that results in the same upper limit on mh1
forms a line. For any choice of λ and κ lying below the line the lightest Higgs particle
has a mass which is less than the theoretical restriction that corresponds to this line.
Curvature of the line characterises the dependence of the upper bound on the lightest
Higgs boson mass on the Yukawa coupling κ. If κ is zero the one–loop contribution of the
exotic squarks to m2
h1 vanishes. When κ grows the exotic squark contribution to m2
h1 and
the upper limit on the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar rise. As a consequence the same
theoretical restriction on mh1 is obtained for smaller values of λ(Mt). But from Figs. 7a
and 7b one can see that the increase of κ(Mt) within the allowed range of the parameter
space does not lead to the appreciable decrease of λ(Mt) that should compensate the
growth of exotic squark contribution to m2
h1. It means that the contribution of the exotic
39

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
squarks is always much smaller than the ﬁrst term in Eq. (76). Numerically the increase
of the lightest Higgs boson mass caused by the inclusion of the exotic squark contribution
does not exceed a few GeV.
5.2.3
Two–loop upper bound
We also include in our analysis leading two–loop corrections to m2
h1 from the top–quark
and its superpartner. In the two–loop leading–log approximation the upper bound on the
lightest Higgs boson mass in the ESSM can be written in the following form
m2
h ≲
λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + M2
Z cos2 2β + M2
Z
4

1 + 1
4 cos 2β
2
×
×

1 −3h2
t
8π2l

+ 3h4
tv2 sin4 β
8π2
1
2Ut + l +
1
16π2
3
2h2
t −8g2
3

(Ut + l)l

+ ∆D
11 ,
(78)
Ut = 2 X2
t
M2
S

1 −1
12
X2
t
M2
S

,
l = ln
M2
S
m2
t

.
Here we keep one–loop leading–log corrections from the exotic squarks. Eq. (78) is a
simple generalisation of the approximate expressions for the theoretical restriction on the
mass of the lightest Higgs particle obtained in the MSSM [69] and NMSSM [70]. The
inclusion of leading two–loop corrections reduces the upper limit on mh1 signiﬁcantly and
nearly compensates the growth of the theoretical restriction on mh1 with increasing SUSY
breaking scale MS which is caused by one–loop corrections.
The dependence of the two–loop upper bound (78) on λ and κ for two diﬀerent choices
of the Yukawa couplings of exotic quarks described above is examined in Figs. 7c and
7d.
After the incorporation of two–loop corrections the line that corresponds to the
160 GeV upper limit on the lightest Higgs boson mass lies beyond the permitted range of
the parameter space while in the one–loop approximation even larger values of mh1 are
allowed. The distortion of the lines, which represent diﬀerent theoretical restrictions on
the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar in the ESSM, still remains negligible. It demonstrates
the fact that the exotic squark contribution to m2
h1 is much less than the leading two–loop
corrections from the top–quark and its superpartners to m2
h1.
From Fig. 7 it follows that for each given value of tan β the mass of the lightest
Higgs particle attains its maximum when λ(Mt) →λmax and κ →0. Nevertheless the
dependence of the upper limit (78) on κ is rather weak so that the theoretical restriction
on the lightest Higgs boson mass for κ = 0 and for κ = g′
1 are almost identical. The
upper limit on mh1 is very sensitive to the choice of λ and tan β. Therefore at the last
stage of our analysis we explore the dependence of the two–loop upper bound (78) on
tan β keeping κ = 0 (i.e. ∆D
11 = 0) and relying on the results of our study of the RG ﬂow
summarised in Fig. 3.
40

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
The dependence of the two–loop theoretical restrictions on mh1 on tan β shown in
Figs. 8a and 8b resembles the tree–level one. But the interval of variations of the upper
bound on mh1 shrinks.
In Figs. 8a and 8b we consider maximal (Xt =
√
6MS) and
minimal (Xt = 0) mixing in the stop sector respectively.
Again at moderate values
of tan β = 1.6 −3.5 the upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson mass in the ESSM is
considerably higher than in the MSSM and NMSSM because of the enhanced contribution
of the F–term of the SM singlet ﬁeld to m2
h1. Although the two–loop theoretical restriction
on mh1 in the ESSM reduces with increasing tan β it still remains 4−5 GeV larger than the
corresponding limits in the MSSM and NMSSM owing to the U(1)N D–term contribution.
This contribution is especially important in the case of minimal mixing between the
superpartners of the top quark. In the considered case the two–loop theoretical restriction
on mh1 in the MSSM and NMSSM is less than the experimental limit on the SM–like Higgs
boson mass set by LEPII. As a result the scenario with Xt = 0 is ruled out in the MSSM.
The contribution of an extra U(1)N D–term to m2
h1 raises the upper bound (78) at large
tan β ≳10 slightly above the existing LEP limit thus relaxing the constraints on the
ESSM parameter space (see Fig. 8b).
The growth of Xt from 0 to
√
6MS increases the theoretical restriction on the lightest
Higgs boson mass in the ESSM by 10 −20 GeV. The upper limit on mh1 is most sensitive
to the choice of Xt at low and large values of tan β where the growth of the corresponding
theoretical restriction reaches 20 and 15 GeV respectively. At the same time the absolute
maximum value of the lightest Higgs boson mass rises by 10 GeV only. In total leading
one–loop and two–loop corrections modify the maximum possible value of the mass of the
lightest Higgs scalar by 20 GeV by increasing it up to about 150 GeV.
Note that the quoted upper limits for the ESSM, as well as the MSSM and NMSSM,
are sensitive to the value of the top–quark mass, and the SUSY breaking scale, and
depend on the precise form of the two–loop approximations used. Here we have used
an analytic approximation of the two–loop eﬀects which slightly underestimates the full
two–loop corrections. We have also taken the SUSY scale to be given by 700 GeV. The
upper bounds quoted here may therefore be further increased by several GeV by making
slightly diﬀerent assumptions. The main point we wish to make is that the upper bound
on the lightest CP–even Higgs scalar in the ESSM is always signiﬁcantly larger than in
the NMSSM, as well as the MSSM.
41

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
6.
Charginos and Neutralinos
6.1
Chargino and neutralino states in the ESSM
After EWSB all superpartners of the gauge and Higgs bosons get non–zero masses. Since
the supermultiplets of the Z′ boson and SM singlet Higgs ﬁeld S are electromagnetically
neutral they do not contribute any extra particles to the chargino spectrum. Consequently
the chargino mass matrix and its eigenvalues remain the same as in the MSSM, namely
m2
χ±
1, 2
=
1
2

M2
2 + µ2
eff + 2M2
W ±
q
(M2
2 + µ2
eff + 2M2
W)2 −4(M2µeff −M2
W sin 2β)2

,
(79)
where M2 is the SU(2) gaugino mass and µeff = λs
√
2. Unsuccessful LEP searches for
SUSY particles including data collected at √s between 90 GeV and 209 GeV set a 95%
CL lower limit on the chargino mass of about 100 GeV [71]. This lower bound constrains
the parameter space of the ESSM restricting the absolute values of the eﬀective µ-term
and M2 from below, i.e. |M2|, |µeff| ≥90 −100 GeV.
In the neutralino sector of the ESSM there are two extra neutralinos besides the four
MSSM ones. One of them is an extra gaugino coming from the Z′ vector supermultiplet.
The other one is an additional Higgsino ˜S (singlino) which is a fermion component of the
SM singlet superﬁeld S. The Higgsino mass terms in the Lagrangian of the ESSM are
induced by the trilinear interaction λS(HdHu) in the superpotential (19) after the break-
down of gauge symmetry. Because of this their values are determined by the coupling λ
and VEVs of the Higgs ﬁelds. The mixing between gauginos and Higgsinos is proportional
to the corresponding gauge coupling and VEV that the scalar partner of the considered
Higgsino gets. Taking this into account one can obtain a 6 × 6 neutralino mass matrix
that in the interaction basis ( ˜B, ˜W3, ˜H0
1, ˜H0
2, ˜S, ˜B′) reads
M˜χ0 =


















M1
0
−1
2g′v1
1
2g′v2
0
0
0
M2
1
2gv1
−1
2gv2
0
0
−1
2g′v1
1
2gv1
0
−µeff
−λv2
√
2
˜Q1g′
1v1
1
2g′v2
−1
2gv2
−µeff
0
−λv1
√
2
˜Q2g′
1v2
0
0
−λv2
√
2
−λv1
√
2
0
˜QSg′
1s
0
0
˜Q1g′
1v1
˜Q2g′
1v2
˜QSg′
1s
M′
1


















,
(80)
where M1, M2 and M′
1 are the soft gaugino masses for ˜B, ˜W3 and ˜B′ respectively. In
Eq. (80) we neglect the Abelian gaugino mass mixing M11 between ˜B and ˜B′ that arises
42

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
at low energies as a result of the kinetic term mixing even if there is no mixing in the
initial values of the soft SUSY breaking gaugino masses near the Grand Uniﬁcation or
Planck scale [52]. The top–left 4×4 block of the mass matrix (80) contains the neutralino
mass matrix of the MSSM where the parameter µ is replaced by µeff. The lower right
2×2 submatrix represents extra components of neutralinos in the considered model. The
neutralino sector in E6 inspired SUSY models was studied recently in [20], [25], [31],
[36]–[37], [40], [72]–[73].
As one can see from Eqs. (79)–(80) the masses of charginos and neutralinos depend
on λ, s, tan β, M1, M′
1 and M2. In SUGRA models with uniform gaugino masses at the
Grand Uniﬁcation scale the RG ﬂow yields a relationship between M1, M′
1 and M2 at the
EW scale:
M′
1 ≃M1 ≃0.5M2 .
(81)
This reduces the parameter space in the neutralino sector of the ESSM drastically. It
allows to study the spectrum of chargino and neutralino as a function of only one gaugino
mass, for example M1, for each set of λ, s and tan β.
6.2
Chargino and neutralino spectrum
The qualitative pattern of chargino and neutralino masses is determined by the Yukawa
coupling λ, depending on whether λ is less than g′
1 or not. Because in the MSSM limit
of the ESSM, when λ →0, the phenomenologically acceptable solution implies that
s ≳MZ/λ, the extra U(1)N gaugino ˜B′ and singlino ˜S decouple from the rest of the
spectrum forming two eigenstates ( ˜B′ ± ˜S)/
√
2 with mass MZ′ = ˜QSg′
1s . Mixing between
new neutralino states and other gauginos and Higgsinos vanishes in this case rendering
the neutralino sector in the ESSM indistinguishable from MSSM at the LHC and ILC.
Here it is worth to emphasise that the direct observation of extra neutralino states in the
ESSM is unlikely to occur in the nearest future anyway. Since oﬀ–diagonal entries of the
bottom right 2 × 2 submatrix of the neutralino mass matrix (80) are controlled by the Z′
boson mass new neutralinos are always very heavy (∼1 TeV) preventing the distinction
between the ESSM and MSSM neutralino sectors.
When λ > g′
1 the typical pattern of the spectrum of neutralinos and charginos changes.
In Figs. 9a and 9b we examine the dependence of the neutralino and chargino masses on
M1 assuming the uniﬁcation of the soft gaugino mass parameters at the scale MX. As a
representative example we ﬁx λ ≃0.794, tan β = 2 and MZ′ = 700 GeV (s ≃1.9 TeV).
We restrict our consideration to the most attractive part of the parameter space, in which
the lightest chargino is accessible at future colliders, i.e. |M1| ≲300 GeV. In order to
get the spectrum of neutralinos we diagonalise the mass matrix (80) numerically. As a
43

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
consequence we obtain a set of positive and negative eigenvalues of this matrix which are
presented in Fig. 9a. However the physical meaning is only their absolute values.
In the considered part of the parameter space the heaviest chargino and neutralinos
are almost degenerate with mass |µeff|. They are formed by the neutral and charged
superpartners of the Higgs bosons. As one can see from Figs. 9a and 9b the masses of
the heaviest chargino and neutralinos are almost insensitive to the choice of the gaugino
masses if |M1| ≲300 GeV. The U(1)N gaugino ˜B′ and singlino ˜S compose two other
heavy neutralino eigenstates whose masses are closely approximated as
|mχ0
3,4| ≃1
2
q
M
′2
1 + 4M2
Z′ ∓M′
1

.
(82)
The four heaviest neutralinos and chargino gain masses beyond 500 GeV range so that
their observation at the LHC and ILC looks rather problematic.
The masses of the
heaviest neutralino and chargino states rise with increasing VEV of the SM singlet ﬁeld
and are practically independent of tan β.
At low energies heavy neutralinos decouple and the spectrum of the two lightest ones
is described by the 2 × 2 mass matrix
M′
˜χ0 ≃




M1 −g
′2v2
4µ sin 2β
gg′v2
4µ
sin 2β
gg′v2
4µ
sin 2β
M2 −g2v2
4µ sin 2β



,
(83)
whose eigenvalues are
|mχ0
1,2|
≃
M1 + M2 −M2
Z
µ sin 2β∓
∓
s
M1 + M2 −M2
Z
µ sin 2β
2
−4

M1M2 −M2
Z
µ
˜
M
 ,
(84)
where
˜
M = M2 sin2 θW + M1 cos2 θW .
The superpartners of charged SU(2) gauge bosons form the lightest chargino state with
mass
|mχ±
1 | =
M2 −M2
W
µ
sin 2β
 .
(85)
The numerical analysis and our analytic consideration show that the masses of the lightest
neutralinos and chargino do not change much when λ, s or tan β vary unless M1 and M2 are
quite small. The second lightest neutralino and the lightest chargino are predominantly
superpartners of the SU(2) gauge bosons.
Their masses are governed by |M2|.
The
lightest neutralino state is basically bino, ˜B, whose mass is set by |M1|.
44

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
In Figs. 10a and 10b we explore the spectrum of neutralino and chargino in the case
when λ is less than g′
1. The Yukawa coupling λ is taken to be 0.3 while the other parame-
ters remain the same as in Fig. 9. Now the two heaviest neutralinos are mixtures of ˜B′ and
˜S. They get masses larger than 500 GeV as before. However unlike in the large λ limit
the other four neutralinos and both charginos can be light enough. Therefore they may
be observed in the nearest future. The composition of the wave functions of the lightest
neutralinos and charginos depends on the choice of the parameters of the model. For the
set of λ, tan β and s chosen in Fig. 10 the lightest neutralino is still predominantly bino,
˜B. Till |M1| is less than 200 GeV, i.e. |M2| < |µeff|, the second lightest neutralino and
the lightest chargino are basically formed by the superpartners of SU(2) gauge bosons.
When |M1| > 200 GeV (|M2| > |µeff|) the wave functions of the second lightest neutralino
and the lightest chargino are Higgsino dominated.
Obvious disadvantage of the considered scenarios with λ < g′
1 and λ > g′
1 in the ESSM
is that any pattern of the masses and couplings of the lightest neutralino and chargino,
which can be observed at the LHC and ILC, may be reproduced in the framework of the
minimal SUSY model. This is a consequence of the stringent lower bound on the mass of
the Z′ boson set by Tevatron.
7.
Z′ and exotic phenomenology
7.1
Masses and couplings of new states
The presence of a Z′ gauge boson and exotic multiplets of matter in the particle spectrum
is a very peculiar feature that permits to distinguish E6 inspired supersymmetric models
from the MSSM or NMSSM. At tree–level the masses of these new particles are determined
by the VEV of the singlet ﬁeld S that remains a free parameter in the considered models.
Therefore the Z′ boson mass and the masses of exotic quarks and non–Higgses cannot
be predicted. But collider experiments [56]–[57] and precision EW tests [74] set stringent
limits on the Z′ mass and Z −Z′ mixing.
The lower bounds on the Z′ mass from
direct searches at the Fermilab Tevatron (pp →Z′ →l+l−) [57] are model dependent
but are typically around 500 −600 GeV unless couplings of ordinary particles to Z′ are
suppressed such as in leptophobic models [53], [75].
Similarly, bounds on the mixing
angle are around (2 −3) ×10−3 [56]. As has been already mentioned, even more stringent
constraints on the Z′ mass and mixing follow from nucleosynthesis and astrophysical
observations. They imply that the equivalent number of additional neutrinos with full–
strength weak interactions ∆Nν is less than 0.3 (for a recent review, see [76]). This requires
MZ′ ≳4.3 TeV [42]. However these restrictions cannot be applied to the Z′ gauge boson
45

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
in the ESSM because right–handed neutrinos here are expected to be superheavy and do
not change the eﬀective number of neutrino species at low energies.
The analysis performed in [77] revealed that Z′ boson in the E6 inspired models can
be discovered at the LHC if its mass is less than 4 −4.5 TeV. At the same time the
determination of the couplings of the Z′ should be possible up to MZ′ ∼2 −2.5 TeV [78].
Possible Z′ decay channels in E6 inspired supersymmetric models were studied in [73].
The restrictions on the masses of exotic particles are not so rigorous as the experimental
bounds on the mass of the Z′ boson. The most stringent constraints come from the non–
observation of exotic colour states at HERA and Tevatron. But most searches imply that
exotic quarks, i.e leptoquarks or diquarks, have integer–spin. So they are either scalars
or vectors. Because of this new coloured objects can be coupled directly to either a pair
of quarks or to quark and lepton. Moreover it is usually assumed that leptoquarks and
diquarks have appreciable couplings to the quarks and leptons of the ﬁrst generation.
Experiments at LEP, HERA and Tevatron excluded such leptoquarks if their masses were
less than 290 GeV [79] whereas CDF and D0 ruled out diquarks with masses up to 420 GeV
[80]. The production of diquarks at the LHC was studied recently in [81].
In the ESSM the exotic squarks and non–Higgses are expected to be heavy since their
masses are determined by the SUSY breaking scale. Moreover, their couplings to the
quarks and leptons of the ﬁrst and second generation should be rather small to avoid
processes with non–diagonal ﬂavour transitions.
As a result the production of exotic
squarks and non–Higgses will be very strongly suppressed or even impossible at future
colliders. However the exotic fermions (quarks and non–Higgsinos) can be relatively light
in the ESSM since their masses are set by the Yukawa couplings κi and λi that may be
small. This happens, for example, when the Yukawa couplings of the exotic particles
have hierarchical structure similar to the one observed in the ordinary quark and lepton
sectors. Then Z′ mass lie beyond 10 TeV and the only manifestation of the considered
model may be the presence of light exotic quark or non–Higgses in the particle spectrum.
The new exotic particles consist of vector–like multiplets with respect to the SM
gauge group. Hence their axial couplings to the SM gauge bosons go to zero in the limit
of no Z −Z′ mixing reducing the contribution of additional particles to the electroweak
observables measured at LEP. The contribution of Z′ gauge boson to the electroweak
observables is also negligibly small because it is supposed to be very heavy so that the
mixing between Z and Z′ almost vanishes.
In order to amplify the signal coming from the presence of additional particles we
shall assume further that the three families of exotic quarks and two generations of ex-
otic non–Higgsinos, whose masses are determined by extra Yukawa couplings, are con-
siderably lighter than the Z′ and in this case they can possibly be observed at the
46

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
LHC and ILC. Since the analysis of the RG ﬂow performed in section 3 revealed that
the exotic quarks as well as non–Higgsino Yukawa couplings tend to be equal we keep
µD1 = µD2 = µD3 = κ(Mt)
√
2 s and µH1 = µH2 = λ1,2(Mt)
√
2
s (λ1(Mt) = λ2(Mt)) at the EW
scale. Moreover to simplify our numerical studies we ﬁx the masses of exotic quarks and
non–Higgsinos to be equal to 300 GeV.
Before proceeding to discuss the scope of future colliders in testing the features of
the ESSM in the Z′ and exotic sectors, we should remind the reader that we assume
the mixing angle between the Z and Z′ to be extremely small. In this case, any vertex
involving a Z′ boson and fermions can be written as
−ig′
1γµ
2

gV −gAγ5

.
(86)
For, e.g. M′
Z = 1.5 TeV, the vector gV (MZ′) and axial gA(MZ′) couplings take the follow-
ing values:
• charged leptons:
gV = ˜QeL −˜Qec
L ≃0.1081,
gA = ˜Qec
L + ˜QeL ≃0.4910 ;
• neutrinos:
gV = gA = ˜QνL = 0.2996 ;
• u–quarks:
gV = ˜QuL −˜Quc
L ≃0.0278,
gA = ˜Quc
L + ˜QuL ≃0.2996 ;
• d–quarks:
gV = ˜QdL −˜Qdc
L ≃−0.1637,
gA = ˜Qdc
L + ˜QdL ≃0.4910 ;
• exotic D–quarks:
gV = ˜QD −˜Q ¯D ≃0.1359,
gA = ˜Q ¯D + ˜QD ≃−0.7906 ;
• fermion partners of extra non–Higgs ﬁelds (non–Higgsinos):
gV = ˜QH1 −˜QH2 ≃−0.1915 ,
gA = ˜QH2 + ˜QH1 ≃−0.7906 ;
• fermion partners of extra singlet ﬁelds (singlinos):
gV = gA = ˜QS ≃0.7906 .
As for additional couplings, the interaction of exotic quarks and non–Higgsinos with
the neutral SM gauge bosons γ and Z takes the form
−ieQemγµ ,
−ig
2 gV γµ ,
respectively, where Qem and gV are given as follows:
• exotic D–quarks: QD
em = −1/3 ,
gV = −2QD
em sin2 θW ;
• charged non–Higgsinos: QE
em = −1 ,
gV = 2T f
3 −2Qf
em sin2 θW ≃−cos 2θW ;
47

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
• neutral non–Higgsinos: QN
em = 0 ,
gV = 1 .
For completeness and to ﬁx our conventions, we also quote the couplings of the γ and Z
bosons to ordinary quarks and leptons, as
• ordinary fermions (quarks and leptons): gV = T f
3 −2Qf
em sin2 θW ,
gA = T f
3 .
7.2
Phenomenology at future colliders
Fig. 11 shows the diﬀerential distribution in invariant mass of the lepton pair l+l−(for
one species of lepton l = e, µ) in Drell-Yan production at the LHC, assuming the SM
only as well as the latter augmented, in turn, by a Z′ ﬁeld (MZ′ = 1.5 TeV) with and
without light exotic quarks or non–Higgsinos (µDi = µHi = 300 GeV) separately7. This
distribution is promptly measurable at the CERN collider with a high resolution and
would enable one to not only conﬁrm the existence of a Z′ state but also to establish the
possible presence as well as nature of additional exotic matter, by simply ﬁtting to the
data the width of the Z′ resonance [78]. In fact for our choice of µDi, µHi and MZ′ the
Z′ total width varies from ≈19 GeV (in case of no exotic matter) to ≈25 GeV (in case
of light exotic D–quarks) and to ≈21 GeV (in case of light non–Higgsinos). (Also notice
the diﬀerent normalisation around the Z′ resonance of the three curves in Fig. 11, as this
scales like ∼Γ(Z′ →l+l−)/Γ(Z′ →anything).) Clearly, in order to perform such an
exercise, the Z′ couplings to ordinary matter ought to have been previously established
elsewhere, as a modiﬁcation of the latter may well lead to eﬀects similar to those induced
by the additional matter present in our model. (Recall that in our model Z′ couplings to
SM particles and exotic matter are simultaneously ﬁxed.)
However, if exotic particles of the nature described here do exist at such low scales, they
could possibly be accessed through direct pair hadroproduction. In fact, the corresponding
fully inclusive cross sections are in principle suﬃcient to such a purpose in the case of
exotic D–quarks (up to masses of the TeV order) while this statement is presumably true
for non–Higgsinos only up to masses of few hundred GeV. (Notice that the former are
generated via gluon-induced QCD interactions while the latter via quark–induced EW
ones.) This should be manifest as a close inspection of Fig. 12.
In practice, detectable ﬁnal states do depend on the underlying nature of the exotic
particles. The lifetime and decay modes of the latter are determined by the operators that
break the ZH
2 symmetry. When ZH
2 is broken signiﬁcantly exotic fermions can produce
a remarkable signature8. Since according to our initial assumptions the ZH
2 symmetry is
7Recall that we assume three identical generations of the former but only two of the latter. Besides,
we allow the existence of only one at a time of either.
8If ZH
2 is only slightly broken exotic quarks and non–Higgsinos may live for a long time. Then exotic
48

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
mostly broken by the operators involving quarks and leptons of the third generation the
exotic quarks decay either via
D →t + ˜b ,
D →b + ˜t ,
if exotic quarks Di are diquarks or via
D →t + ˜τ ,
D →τ + ˜t ,
D →b + ˜ντ ,
D →ντ + ˜b ,
if exotic quarks of type D are leptoquarks.
Because in general sfermions decay into
corresponding fermion and neutralino one can expect that each diquark will decay further
into t– and b–quarks while a leptoquark will produce a t–quark and τ–lepton in the
ﬁnal state with rather high probability. Thus the presence of light exotic quarks in the
particle spectrum could result in an appreciable enhancement of the cross section of either
pp →ttbb + X and pp →bbbb + X if exotic quarks are diquarks or pp →ttτ +τ −+ X
and consequently pp →bbτ +τ −+ X if new quark states are leptoquarks9. In compliance
with our initial assumptions non–Higgsinos decay predominantly into either quarks and
squarks or leptons and sleptons of the third generation as well, i.e.
˜H0 →t + ˜t ,
˜H0 →t + ˜t ,
˜H0 →b + ˜b ,
˜H0 →b + ˜b ,
˜H0 →τ + ˜τ ,
˜H0 →τ + ˜τ ,
˜H−→b + ˜t ,
˜H−→t + ˜b ,
˜H−→τ + ˜ντ ,
˜H−→ντ + ˜τ .
If we assume again that a sfermion decays predominantly into the corresponding fermion
and neutralino then also the production of non–Higgsinos should lead to a signiﬁcant
enlargement of the cross sections of Q ¯QQ(′) ¯Q(′) and Q ¯Qτ +τ −production, where Q is a
heavy quark of the third generation, that allows to identify these particles if they are light
enough.
As each t–quark decays into a b–quark whereas a τ–lepton gives one charged lepton l
in the ﬁnal state with a probability of 35%, both these scenarios would generate an excess
in the b–quark production cross section. In this respect SM data samples which should
be altered by the presence of exotic D–quarks or non–Higgsinos are those involving t¯t
quarks will form compound states with ordinary quarks. It means that at future colliders it may be
possible to study the spectroscopy of new composite scalar leptons or baryons. Also one can observe
quasi–stable charged colourless fermions with zero lepton number.
9It is worth to remind here that the production cross sections of pp →ttbb+ X and pp →ttτ +τ −+ X
in the SM are suppressed at least by a factor
αs
π
2
and
αW
π
2
respectively as compared to the cross
section of tt pair production (and, similarly, for t–quarks replaced by b–quarks).
49

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
production and decay as well as direct b¯b production. For this reason, Fig. 13 also shows
the cross sections for these two genuine SM processes alongside those for the exotica.
Detailed LHC analyses will be required to establish the feasibility of extracting the excess
due to the light exotic particles predicted by our model. However, Fig. 13 should clearly
make the point that – for the discussed parameter conﬁguration – one is in a favourable
position in this respect, as the rates for the exotica times their BRs into the aforementioned
decay channels are typically larger than the expected four–body cross sections involving
heavy quarks and/or leptons.
The situation will experimentally be much easier at a future ILC. Here, under the
same assumptions as above concerning their decay patterns, both species of exotic par-
ticles should contribute to the inclusive hadronic cross section, see Fig. 14. Assuming,
again, the mass choice µDi = µHi = 300 GeV, the onset at 600 GeV of the exotic pair
production threshold would clearly be visible above the SM continuum (with or without
a much heavier Z′, again, with MZ′ = 1.5 TeV). The rise of the hadronic cross section
at √s = 2µDi = 2µHi would be diﬀerent, depending on the kind of exotic particles being
generated, owning to the diﬀerent EW charges involved and the fact that three genera-
tions of light D’s can be allowed in our model as opposed to only two in the case of light
eH’s (as already intimated). Furthermore, the line shape of the Z′ resonance would be
diﬀerent too, depending on whether one or the other kind of exotic matter is allowed.
Both the enormous luminosity and extremely clean environment of an ILC, joined with
a signiﬁcant degree of control on the beam energy spread, should allow one to explore in
detail all such possible features of the hadronic cross section. In fact, as the actual value
of the ILC beam energy has yet to be ﬁxed and our illustrative choice for µDi and µHi may
not correspond to what nature has chosen, we present in Fig. 15 the mass dependence of
the pair production cross section for our exotic states at two reference collider energies, of
700 GeV and identical to the Z′ mass. While the scope for exotic D–quark production at
the ILC has probably little to add to what could be obtained earlier at the LHC, a TeV
scale e+e−linear collider is deﬁnitely crucial in increasing the discovery reach in mass for
non–Higgsinos beyond the limits obtainable at the CERN hadronic machine.
8.
Conclusions
In this paper we have made a comprehensive study of the theory and phenomenology of
a low energy supersymmetric standard model originating from a string-inspired E6 grand
uniﬁed gauge group, which we called Exceptional Supersymmetric Standard Model, or
ESSM for short. The ESSM considered here is based on the low energy SM gauge group
together with an extra Z′ corresponding to an extra U(1)N gauge symmetry under which
50

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
right–handed neutrinos have zero charge.
This allows right–handed neutrinos to gain
large Majorana masses, resulting in the conventional (high-scale) seesaw mechanism for
neutrino masses. The extra U(1)N gauge symmetry survives to the TeV scale, and forbids
the term µHdHu in the superpotential, but permits the term λS(HuHd), where S is a low
energy singlet that carries U(1)N charge and breaks the gauge symmetry when it develops
its VEV, giving rise to a massive Z′ and an eﬀective µ term. Therefore the µ problem of
the MSSM is solved in a similar way to that in the NMSSM, but without the accompanying
problems of singlet tadpoles or domain walls since there is no S3 term, and the would-be
Goldstone boson is eaten by the Z′.
The low energy matter content of the ESSM corresponds to three 27 representations
of the E6 symmetry group, to ensure anomaly cancellation, plus an additional pair of
Higgs–like doublets as required for high energy gauge coupling uniﬁcation. The ESSM is
therefore a low energy alternative to the MSSM or NMSSM. The ESSM involves extra
matter beyond the MSSM contained in three 5 + 5∗representations of SU(5), plus a total
of three SU(5) singlets which carry U(1)N charges. Thus there are three families of new
exotic charge 1/3 quarks and non–Higgs multiplets predicted in the ESSM, in addition to
the Z′.
As in the MSSM, the gauge symmetry of the ESSM does not forbid baryon and lepton
number violating interactions that result in rapid proton decay.
The straightforward
generalisation of R–parity, assuming that the exotic quarks carry the same baryon number
as the ordinary ones, guarantees not only proton stability but also the stability of the
lightest exotic quark. The presence of heavy stable exotic quarks, that should survive
annihilation, is ruled out by diﬀerent experiments. Therefore the R–parity deﬁnition in
the ESSM has to be modiﬁed. There are two diﬀerent ways to impose an appropriate
Z2 symmetry that lead to two diﬀerent versions of the ESSM where baryon and lepton
number is conserved. ESSM version I implies that exotic quarks have twice larger baryon
number than the ordinary quark ﬁelds. In the ESSM version II exotic quarks carry baryon
and lepton numbers simultaneously.
Because the supermultiplets of exotic matter interact with the quark, lepton and Higgs
superﬁelds the Lagrangian of the ESSM includes many new Yukawa couplings. In general
these couplings give rise to the processes with non–diagonal ﬂavour transitions that have
not been observed yet. In order to suppress ﬂavour changing processes and to provide the
correct breakdown of gauge symmetry we assumed a hierarchical structure of the Yukawa
interactions, and imposed an approximate ZH
2 symmetry under which all superﬁelds are
odd except Higgs doublets (Hu and Hd) and singlet ﬁeld S. With these assumptions only
one SM singlet ﬁeld S may have appreciable couplings with exotic quarks and SU(2)
doublets H1i and H2i and the couplings are ﬂavour diagonal. It also follows that only one
51

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
pair of SU(2) Higgs doublets Hd and Hu have Yukawa couplings to the ordinary quarks
and leptons of order unity. The Yukawa couplings of other exotic particles to the quarks
and leptons of the ﬁrst two generations must be less than 10−4 and 10−3 respectively
in order to suppress FCNCs. We would like to emphasise that from the perspective of
REWSB these assumptions are completely natural. Without loss of generality it is always
possible to work in a basis where only one family of singlets S and Higgs doublets Hd and
Hu have VEVs and the remaining states do not (the non–Higgs). Then REWSB makes
it natural that the so deﬁned Higgs ﬁelds have large couplings to third family quarks and
leptons, while the non–Higgs ﬁelds have small couplings.
We have analysed the RG ﬂow of the gauge and Yukawa couplings in the framework of
the ESSM taking into account kinetic term mixing between U(1)Y and U(1)N. Imposing
the gauge coupling uniﬁcation at high energies we have found that the gauge coupling of
the extra U(1)N is very close to the U(1)Y gauge coupling while the oﬀ–diagonal gauge
coupling which describes the mixing between U(1)Y and U(1)N is negligibly small. Since
by construction extra exotic quarks and non–Higgses ﬁll in complete SU(5) representa-
tions the Grand Uniﬁcation scale remains almost the same as in the MSSM. At the same
time the overall gauge coupling g0 that characterises gauge interactions above the scale
MX is considerably larger than in the MSSM: g0 ≃1.21. The increase of the gauge cou-
plings at the Grand Uniﬁcation and intermediate scales in the ESSM is caused by the
extra supermultiplets of exotic matter.
The growth of gi(Q) relaxes the restrictions on the Yukawa couplings coming from
the validity of perturbation theory up to the scale MX as compared with the MSSM.
In particular ht and λ can take larger values at the EW scale than in the constrained
MSSM and NMSSM. If the top–quark Yukawa coupling is large at the Grand Uniﬁcation
scale, i.e. ht(MX) ≳1, the solutions of the RG equations for the Yukawa couplings in
the gaugeless limit approach the invariant line and along this line are attracted to the
quasi–ﬁxed point where λ(Mt) is going to zero. After the inclusion of gauge couplings,
the valley along which the solutions of RG equations ﬂow to the ﬁxed point disappear
but their convergence to the ﬁxed point becomes even stronger. The analysis of the RG
ﬂow shows that the Yukawa couplings of top– and exotic quarks tend to dominate over
the Yukawa couplings of non–Higgs supermultiplets that are considerably larger than λ
at the EW scale. However the solutions for the Yukawa couplings are concentrated near
the ﬁxed points only when ht(MX) is large enough that corresponds to tan β ≃1 −1.1.
At moderate and large values of tan β the values of the Yukawa couplings at the EW scale
may be quite far from the stable ﬁxed point. As a result for values of tan β ≳1.5 the
coupling λ(Mt) can be comparable with the top–quark Yukawa coupling.
We have used the above theoretical restrictions on tan β and λ for the analysis of the
52

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
Higgs, neutralino and chargino sectors of the ESSM. Although the particle content of
the ESSM involves many particles with similar quantum number only one singlet ﬁeld S
and two Higgs doublets Hu and Hd acquire VEVs breaking the SU(2) × U(1)Y × U(1)N
symmetry. Since the Higgs sector of the ESSM contains only one new ﬁeld S and one
additional parameter compared to the MSSM it can be regarded as the simplest extension
of the Higgs sector of the MSSM. As in the MSSM, the ESSM Higgs sector does not provide
extra sources for the CP–violation at tree–level. The ESSM Higgs spectrum includes three
CP–even, one CP–odd and two charged states. The singlet dominated CP–even state is
always almost degenerate with the Z′ gauge boson. The masses of another CP–even and
charged Higgs ﬁelds are set by the mass of pseudoscalar state mA. The lightest CP–even
Higgs boson is conﬁned around the EW scale. The superpartners of the Z′ boson and
singlet ﬁeld S also contribute to the ESSM neutralino spectrum while the number of states
in the chargino sector remain the same as in the MSSM. The masses of extra states in
the neutralino sector are governed by MZ′.
The qualitative pattern of the Higgs, neutralino and chargino spectra in the ESSM is
determined by the Yukawa coupling λ. When λ << g1 (the MSSM limit of the ESSM)
new states in the Higgs and neutralino sectors become very heavy and decouple from the
rest of the spectrum making them indistinguishable from the MSSM ones. In the case
when λ ≳g1 the lightest Higgs scalar can be heavier than in the MSSM and NMSSM. In
this case the vacuum stability requirement constrains mA so that the heaviest CP–even,
CP–odd and charged states lie beyond the TeV range. It means that in this case only
the lightest Higgs scalar can be discovered at the LHC and ILC. We have found that the
mass of the lightest Higgs particle does not exceed 150 GeV.
If λ ≳g1 then the heaviest chargino and neutralino are formed by the neutral and
charged superpartners of the Higgs doublets Hu and Hd. Extra neutralino states are lighter
than the heaviest one but still too heavy to be observed in the near future. The lightest
chargino is predominantly superpartner of W ± gauge bosons while the lightest neutralino
state is basically bino. We have obtained the approximate solutions for the masses and
couplings of the Higgs particles as well as for the masses of the lightest neutralino and
chargino.
As we have already mentioned the ESSM predicts the existence of many new exotic
quarks and non–Higgsinos. They compose vector–like multiplets of matter with respect
to the SM gauge group, so that the axial couplings of the SM gauge bosons to exotic
particles vanish. As a consequence their contributions to the EW observables measured
at LEP are suppressed by inverse powers of their masses. The contribution of the Z′ is
also negligibly small since the latter is supposed to be very heavy and practically does
not mix with the Z boson. At the same time Z′, exotic quarks and non–Higgsinos can be
53

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
produced directly at future colliders if they are light enough. The lifetime of new exotic
particles is deﬁned by the extent to which the ZH
2 symmetry is broken. If ZH
2 was exact
the lightest exotic quark would be absolutely stable. Since we have assumed that ZH
2
is mainly broken by the operators involving quarks and leptons of the third generation
the exotic quarks decay into either two heavy quarks Q ¯Q or a heavy quark and a lepton
Qτ(ντ), where Q is either a b– or t–quark. If exotic quarks are light enough they will be
intensively produced at the LHC. In the case when ZH
2 is broken signiﬁcantly this results
in the growth of the cross section of either pp →Q ¯QQ(′) ¯Q(′) + X or pp →Q ¯Ql+l−+ X,
with l = e, µ. If the violation of the ZH
2 invariance is extremely small then a set of new
baryons or composite leptons containing quasi–stable exotic quarks could be discovered
at the LHC. As compared with the exotic quarks the production of non–Higgsinos will
be rather suppressed at the LHC. In contrast, at an ILC the production rates of exotic
quarks and non–Higgsinos can be comparable allowing their simultaneous observation.
The Z′ gauge boson has to be detected at the LHC if it has a mass below 4 −4.5 TeV.
The ESSM can in principle be derived from a rank–6 model which naturally arises
after the breakdown of the E6 symmetry via the Hosotani mechanism near the string
or Grand Uniﬁcation scale MX. The discovery at future colliders of the exotic particles
and extra Z′ boson predicted by the ESSM would therefore represent a possible indirect
signature of an underlying E6 gauge structure at high energies, and provide circumstantial
evidence for superstring theory.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to A. Djouadi, J. Kalinowski, D. J. Miller and P. M. Zerwas for
valuable comments and remarks. RN would also like to thank E. Boos, D. I. Kazakov
and M. I. Vysotsky for fruitful discussions. The authors acknowledge support from the
PPARC grant PPA/G/S/2003/00096, the NATO grant PST.CLG.980066 and the EU
network MRTN 2004–503369.
54

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
Figure captions
Fig.
1.
(a) RG ﬂow of a set of points in the (λ/ht)–(κ/ht) plane in the gaugeless
limit (g0 = 0). (b) The running of
 λ(µ)
ht(µ)

versus
 κ(µ)
ht(µ)

. The gauge couplings are
included. In both cases the energy scale µ is varied from MX to Mt, ht(MX) = 10, while
the Yukawa couplings of the exotic quark and non–Higgs supermultiplets of the ﬁrst and
second generations are set to zero. Diﬀerent trajectories correspond to diﬀerent initial
conditions for λ and κ at the scale MX.
Fig.
2. (a) The allowed range of the parameter space in the (κ/ht)–(λ/ht) plane for
κ1 = κ2 = λ1 = λ2 = 0 and tan β = 2 where the couplings are evaluated at the top mass
µ = Mt. (b) RG ﬂow of
 κ(µ)
ht(µ)

versus
 λ(µ)
ht(µ)

for tan β = 2. The Yukawa couplings
of the exotic quark and non–Higgs supermultiplets of the ﬁrst and second generations are
taken to be zero. Diﬀerent trajectories correspond to diﬀerent initial conditions at the
EW scale. The solutions of the RG equations ﬂow from the left to the right when the RG
scale changes from Mt to MX. (c) Upper limit on (κ/ht) versus (λ/ht) for κ1 = κ2 = κ,
λ1 = λ2 = 0 and tan β = 2. (d) The allowed part of the parameter space in the (κ/ht)–
(λ/ht) plane for κ1 = κ2 = κ, λ1(Mt) = λ2(Mt) = λ(Mt) and tan β = 2.
Fig.
3. Upper limit on λ versus tan β.
Fig. 4. Higgs masses and couplings for λ(Mt) = 0.794, tan β = 2, MZ′ = MS = 700 GeV
and Xt =
√
6MS. (a) The dependence of the lightest Higgs boson mass on mA. (b) One–
loop masses of the CP–even Higgs bosons versus mA. Solid, dashed and dashed–dotted
lines correspond to the masses of the lightest, second lightest and heaviest Higgs scalars
respectively. (c) One–loop masses of the CP–odd, heaviest CP–even and charged Higgs
bosons versus mA. Dotted, dashed–dotted and solid lines correspond to the masses of
the charged, heaviest scalar and pseudoscalar states. (d) Absolute values of the relative
couplings RZZhi of the Higgs scalars to Z pairs. Solid, dashed and dashed–dotted curves
represent the dependence of the couplings of the lightest, second lightest and heaviest
CP–even Higgs states to Z pairs on mA. (e) Absolute values of the relative couplings
RZAhi of the CP–even Higgs bosons to the Higgs pseudoscalar and Z as a function of mA.
The notations are the same as in Fig. 4c.
Fig.
5. Higgs masses and couplings for λ(Mt) = 0.3, tan β = 2, MZ′ = MS = 700 GeV
and Xt =
√
6MS. (a) The dependence of the lightest Higgs boson mass on mA. (b)
One–loop masses of the Higgs scalars versus mA. (c) One–loop masses of the CP–odd,
heaviest CP–even and charged Higgs states versus mA. (d) Absolute values of the relative
55

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
couplings RZZhi of the CP–even Higgs bosons to Z pairs. (e) Absolute values of the relative
couplings RZAhi of the Higgs scalars to the Higgs pseudoscalar and Z as a function of mA.
The notations are the same as in Fig. 4.
Fig.
6. (a) Diﬀerent contributions to the tree–level upper bound on mh1 in the ESSM
versus tan β. Solid line represents the tree–level theoretical restriction on the lightest
Higgs boson mass in the MSSM: MZ| cos 2β|. Dash–dotted line is a contribution of extra
U(1)N D–term: g
′
1v
 ˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β
. Dotted line is the maximum possible contri-
bution of the F–term corresponding to the SM singlet ﬁeld S:
λ
√
2
v sin 2β. (b) tree–level
upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson mass as a function of tan β. The solid, lower
and upper dotted lines correspond to the theoretical restrictions on mh1 in the MSSM,
NMSSM and ESSM respectively.
Fig.
7. (a) One–loop upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson mass as a function of the
Yukawa couplings in the (λ/ht)–(κ/ht) plane for κ1(Mt) = κ2(Mt) = 0 and κ3(Mt) = κ.
(b) One–loop upper limit on mh1 versus Yukawa couplings in the (λ/ht)–(κ/ht) plane for
κ1(Mt) = κ2(Mt) = κ3(Mt) = κ. (c) Two–loop upper limit on mh1 as a function of the
Yukawa couplings in the (λ/ht)–(κ/ht) plane for κ1(Mt) = κ2(Mt) = 0 and κ3(Mt) = κ.
(d) Two–loop upper bound on the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar versus Yukawa cou-
plings in the (λ/ht)–(κ/ht) plane for κ1(Mt) = κ2(Mt) = κ3(Mt) = κ.
Thick, solid,
dash–dotted and dashed lines in Figs. 7a–7d correspond to mh = 160, 150, 140, 130 GeV
respectively.
The dotted line represent the allowed range of the parameter space for
λ1(Mt) = λ2(Mt) = 0.
Theoretical restrictions on the lightest Higgs boson mass are
obtained for tan β = 2, m2
Q = m2
U = m2
Di = m2
Di = M2
S, Xt =
√
6MS and MS = 700 GeV.
Fig.
8. (a) The dependence of the two–loop upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson
mass on tan β for mt(Mt) = 165 GeV, m2
Q = m2
U = M2
S, Xt =
√
6MS and MS = 700 GeV.
The solid, lower and upper dotted lines represent the theoretical restrictions on mh1 in
the MSSM, NMSSM and ESSM respectively. (b) Two–loop upper bound on the mass of
the lightest Higgs particle in the MSSM, NMSSM and ESSM versus tan β for Xt = 0.
Other parameters and notations are the same as in Fig. 8a.
Fig.
9.
(a) Neutralino spectrum in the ESSM as function of M1 for λ(Mt) = 0.794,
tan β = 2 and MZ′ = 700 GeV. (Only the absolute values of the neutralino masses have
physical meaning.) (b) Chargino masses versus M1. The parameters are the same as in
Fig. 9a.
56

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
Fig.
10. (a) The dependence of neutralino masses in the ESSM on M1 for λ(Mt) = 0.3,
tan β = 2 and MZ′ = 700 GeV. (Only the absolute values of the neutralino masses have
physical meaning.) (b) Chargino spectrum as function of M1. The set of parameters is
the same as in Fig. 10a.
Fig.
11. Diﬀerential cross section in the ﬁnal state invariant mass, denoted by Ml+l−,
at the LHC for Drell-Yan production (l = e or µ only) in presence of a Z′ with and
without the (separate) contribution of exotic D–quarks or non–Higgsinos ˜H (both via
EW interactions), with µDi = µHi = 300 GeV. Here, MZ′ = 1.5 TeV.
Fig.
12. Cross section at the LHC for pair production of exotic D–quarks (via QCD
interactions) as well as non–Higgsinos ˜H (via EW interactions), as a function of their
(common) mass, denoted by MF. Here, MZ′ = 1.5 TeV.
Fig.
13. Diﬀerential cross section in the ﬁnal state invariant mass, denoted by MF F,
at the LHC for pair production of b–, t– and exotic D–quarks (all via QCD interactions)
as well as non–Higgsinos ˜H (via EW interactions), with µDi = µHi = 300 GeV. Note the
rescaling of the rates for the ﬁrst and last process. Here, MZ′ = 1.5 TeV.
Fig.
14. Energy-dependent hadronic cross section at a future ILC in the SM with an
additional Z′, with and without the (separate) contribution of exotic D–quarks or non–
Higgsinos ˜H (both via EW interactions), with µDi = µHi = 300 GeV. Here, MZ′ = 1.5
TeV.
Fig.
15. Cross section at a future ILC for pair production of exotic D–quarks and of
non–Higgsinos ˜H (both via EW interactions), as a function of their (common) mass, ,
denoted by MF, for two collider energies. Here, MZ′ = 1.5 TeV.
57

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
λ(µ)
ht(µ)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(µ)/ht(µ)
Fig. 1a
λ(µ)
ht(µ)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(µ)/ht(µ)
Fig. 1b
58

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
κ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
λ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 2a
κ(µ)
ht(µ)
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
λ(µ)/ht(µ)
Fig. 2b
59

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
κ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
λ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 2c
κ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
λ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 2d
60

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
λmax
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
tan β
Fig. 3
61

=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
mh1
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
3000
3250
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
mA
Fig. 4a
mhi
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
mA
Fig. 4b
62

=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
mA, H±, h3
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
mA
Fig. 4c
63

=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
|RZZi|
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
3000
3250
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
mA
Fig. 4d
|RZAi|
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
3000
3250
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
mA
Fig. 4e
64

=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
mh1
0
500
1000
1500
2000
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
mA
Fig. 5b
mhi
0
500
1000
1500
2000
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
mA
Fig. 5a
65

=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
mA, H±, h3
0
500
1000
1500
2000
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
mA
Fig. 5c
66

=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
|RZZi|
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
mA
Fig. 5d
|RZAi|
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
mA
Fig. 5e
67

=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
mh1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
tan β
Fig. 6a
mh1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
tan β
Fig. 6b
68

=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
λ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 7a
λ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 7b
69

=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
λ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 7c
λ(Mt)
ht(Mt)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
κ(Mt)/ht(Mt)
Fig. 7d
70

=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
mh1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
tan β
Fig. 8a
mh1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
tan β
Fig. 8b
71

=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
mχi
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
M1
Fig. 9a
mχ±
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
200
400
600
800
1000
M1
Fig. 9b
72

=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
mχi
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
-750
-500
-250
0
250
500
750
1000
M1
Fig. 10a
mχ±
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
M1
Fig. 10b
73

=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
Fig. 11
74

=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
Fig. 12
75

=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
Fig. 13
76

=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
Fig. 14
77

=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
Fig. 15a
Fig. 15b
78

=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
References
[1] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 188 (1981) 513; N. Sakai, Z. Phys. C 11 (1981) 153; S.
Dimopoulos, H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B 193 (1981) 150; R. K. Kaul, P. Majumdar,
Nucl. Phys. B 199 (1982) 36.
[2] E. Gildener, S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D 13 (1976) 3333; E. Gildener, Phys. Rev. D
14 (1976) 1667.
[3] D. J. H. Chung, L. L. Everett, G. L. Kane, S. F. King, J. Lykken, L. T. Wang, Phys.
Rept. 407 (2005) 1.
[4] J. Ellis, S. Kelley, D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B 249 (1990) 441; J. Ellis, S.
Kelley, D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B 260 (1991) 131; U. Amaldi, W. de Boer, H.
Furstenau, Phys. Lett. B 260 (1991) 447; P. Langacker, M. Luo, Phys. Rev. D 44
(1991) 817.
[5] H. Georgi, S. L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32 (1974) 438.
[6] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz, E. Witten, Superstring Theory (Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1987).
[7] P. Horava, E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 460 (1996) 506; Nucl. Phys. B 475 (1996) 94.
[8] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B 471 (1996) 135; T. Banks, M. Dine, Nucl. Phys. B 479
(1996) 173; K. Choi, H. B. Kim, C. Mu˜noz, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 7521.
[9] F. del Aguila, G. A. Blair, M. Daniel, G. G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B 272 (1986) 413.
[10] R. Barbieri, S. Ferrara, C. Savoy, Phys. Lett. B 119 (1982) 343; H. P. Nilles, M.
Srednicki, D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. B 120 (1983) 345; L. Hall, J. Lykken, S. Weinberg,
Phys. Rev. D 27 (1983) 2359; S. K. Soni, H. A. Weldon, Phys. Lett. B 126 (1983)
215.
[11] H. P. Nilles, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 5 (1990) 4199.
[12] A. Salam, J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975) 1521; M. T. Grisaru, W. Siegel, M.
Rocek, Nucl. Phys. B 159 (1979) 429.
[13] H. P. Nilles, M. Srednicki, D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. B 120 (1983) 346; J. M. Frere, D.
R. T. Jones, S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B 222 (1983) 11; J. P. Derendinger, C. A. Savoy,
Nucl. Phys. B 237 (1984) 307; M. I. Vysotsky, K. A. Ter-Martirosian, Sov. Phys.
JETP 63 (1986) 489; J. Ellis, J. F. Gunion, H. Haber, L. Roszkowski, F. Zwirner,
Phys. Rev. D 39 (1989) 844.
79

=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
[14] L. Durand, J. L. Lopez, Phys. Lett. B 217 (1989) 463; L. Drees, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
A 4 (1989) 3635.
[15] Ya. B. Zel’dovich, I. Yu. Kobzarev, L. B. Okun, Sov. Phys. JETP 40 (1975) 1.
[16] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rept. 121 (1985) 263; A. Vilenkin, E. P. S. Shellard, Cosmic
Strings and Other Topological Defects (Cambridge University Press, 1994).
[17] S. A. Abel, S. Sarkar, P. L. White, Nucl. Phys. B 454 (1995) 663.
[18] J. L. Hewett, T. G. Rizzo, Phys. Rept. 183 (1989) 193; J. F. Gunion, H. E. Haber,
G. L. Kane, S. Dawson, “The Higgs Hunter’s Guide,” SCIPP-89/13; P. Binetruy,
S. Dawson, I. Hinchliﬀe, M. Sher, Nucl. Phys. B 273 (1986) 501; J. R. Ellis, K. En-
qvist, D. V. Nanopoulos, F. Zwirner, Nucl. Phys. B 276 (1986) 14; L. E. Ibanez,
J. Mas, Nucl. Phys. B 286 (1987) 107; J. F. Gunion, L. Roszkowski, H. E. Haber,
Phys.
Lett. B 189 (1987) 409; H. E. Haber, M. Sher, Phys.
Rev. D 35 (1987)
2206; J. R. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos, S. T. Petcov, F. Zwirner, Nucl. Phys. B 283
(1987) 93; M. Drees, Phys. Rev. D 35 (1987) 2910; H. Baer, D. Dicus, M. Drees,
X. Tata, Phys. Rev. D 36 (1987) 1363; J. F. Gunion, L. Roszkowski, H. E. Haber,
Phys. Rev. D 38 (1988) 105.
[19] M. Cvetiˇc, P. Langacker, Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 3570; Mod. Phys. Lett. A 11 (1996)
1247.
[20] M. Cvetiˇc, D. Demir, J. R. Espinosa, L. L. Everett, P. Langacker, Phys. Rev. D 56
(1997) 2861.
[21] J. Erler, Nucl. Phys. B 586 (2000) 73.
[22] D. A. Demir, G. L. Kane, T. T. Wang, hep-ph/0503290.
[23] P. Langacker, M. Plumacher, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 013006; V. Barger, C. W.
Chiang, P. Langacker, H. S. Lee, Phys. Lett. B 580 (2004) 186; V. Barger, C. W.
Chiang, J. Jiang, P. Langacker, Phys. Lett. B 596 (2004) 229.
[24] D. Suematsu, Y. Yamagishi, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 10 (1995) 4521;
[25] E. Keith, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 56 (1997) 7155.
[26] P. Langacker, J. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 115010.
[27] Y. Daikoku, D. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 095006.
[28] D. A. Demir, L. L. Everett, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 015008.
80

=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
[29] J. -H. Kang, P. Langacker, T. -J. Li, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 015012.
[30] E. Ma, Phys. Lett. B 380 (1996) 286.
[31] B. de Carlos, J. R. Espinosa, Phys. Lett. B 407 (1997) 12; V. Barger, C. Kao, P.
Langacker, H. -S. Lee, Phys. Lett. B 600 (2004) 104.
[32] T. Hambye, E. Ma, M. Raidal, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B 512 (2001) 373.
[33] J. Kang, P. Langacker, T. -J. Li, T. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 061801.
[34] E. Ma, M. Raidal, J. Phys. G 28 (2002) 95.
[35] V. Barger, C. Kao, P. Langacker, H. -S. Lee, Phys. Lett. B 614 (2005) 67.
[36] D. Suematsu, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 12 (1997) 1709.
[37] D. Suematsu, Phys. Lett. B 416 (1998) 108.
[38] A. E. Faraggi, M. Thormeier, Nucl. Phys. B 624 (2002) 163.
[39] J. Erler, P. Langacker, T. -J. Li, Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 015002; T. Han, P. Lan-
gacker, B. McElrath, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 115006.
[40] E. Keith, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 3587. D. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998)
1738.
[41] Y. Hosotani, Phys. Lett. B 129 (1983) 193.
[42] V. Barger, P. Langacker, H. S. Lee, Phys. Rev. D 67 (2003) 075009.
[43] P. Di Bari, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002) 043509.
[44] M. Fukugita, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 174 (1986) 45.
[45] V. A. Kuzmin, V. A. Rubakov, M. E. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Lett. B 155 (1985) 36.
[46] J. Rich, M. Spiro, J. Lloyd–Owen, Phys. Rept. 151 (1987) 239; P. F. Smith, Contemp.
Phys. 29 (1988) 159; T. K. Hemmick et al. , Phys. Rev. D 41 (1990) 2074.
[47] S. Wolfram, Phys. Lett. B 82 (1979) 65; C. B. Dover, T. K. Gaisser, G. Steigman,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 1117.
[48] E. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 (1988) 1363.
[49] G. F. Giudice, A. Masiero, Phys. Lett. B 206 (1988) 480; J. A. Casas, C. Mu˜noz,
Phys. Lett. B 306 (1993) 288.
81

=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
[50] L. E. Ib´a˜nez, G. G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 110 (1982) 215; J. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos,
K. Tamvakis, Phys. Lett. B 121 (1983) 123; J. Ellis, J. Hagelin, D. V. Nanopoulos,
K. Tamvakis, Phys. Lett. B 125 (1983) 275; L. Alvarez-Gaum´e, J. Polchinski, M.
Wise, Nucl. Phys. B 221 (1983) 495.
[51] B. Holdom, Phys. Lett. B 166 (1986) 196.
[52] D. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 055017.
[53] K. S. Babu, C. Kolda, J. March–Russell, Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 4635; T. G. Rizzo,
Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 015020.
[54] K. Hagiwara et al. , Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 010001.
[55] B. Schrempp, F. Schrempp, Phys. Lett. B 299 (1993) 321; B. Schrempp, Phys. Lett.
B 344 (1995) 193; B. Schrempp, M. Wimmer, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 37 (1996) 1.
[56] P. Abreu et al. [DELPHI Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 485 (2000) 45; R. Barate et
al. [ALEPH Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C 12 (2000) 183.
[57] F. Abe et al. [CDF Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 2192.
[58] A. Brignole, J. Ellis, G. Ridolﬁ, F. Zwirner, Phys. Lett. B 271 (1991) 123; P. H.
Chankowski, S. Pokorski, J. Rosiek, Phys. Lett. B 274 (1992) 191; A. Brignole,
Phys. Lett. B 277 (1992) 313; H. E. Haber, R. Hempﬂing, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993)
4280.
[59] T. Elliott, S. F. King, P. L. White, Phys. Lett. B 314 (1993) 56; U. Ellwanger, Phys.
Lett. B 303 (1993) 271; U. Ellwanger, M. Lindner, Phys. Lett. B 301 (1993) 365;
T. Elliott, S. F. King, P. L. White, Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 2435; S. F. King, P. L.
White, Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 4183; S. W. Ham, S. K. Oh, B. R. Kim, Phys. Lett.
B 414 (1997) 305.
[60] P. A. Kovalenko, R. B. Nevzorov, K. A. Ter–Martirosyan, Phys. Atom. Nucl. 61
(1998) 812.
[61] P. N. Pandita, Phys. Lett. B 318 (1993) 338; P. N. Pandita, Z. Phys. C 59 (1993)
575; S. W. Ham, S. K. Oh, B. R. Kim, J. Phys. G 22 (1996) 1575.
[62] D. J. Miller, R. Nevzorov, P. M. Zerwas, Nucl. Phys. B 681 (2004) 3; R. Nevzorov,
D. J. Miller, Proceedings to the 7th Workshop ”What comes beyond the Standard
Model”, ed. by N. S. Mankoc-Borstnik, H. B. Nielsen, C. D. Froggatt, D. Lukman,
DMFA–Zaloznistvo, Ljubljana, 2004, p. 107; hep-ph/0411275.
82

=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
[63] K. Inoue, A. Kakuto, H. Komatsu, S. Takeshita, Prog. Theor. Phys. 67 (1982) 1889;
R. Flores, M. Sher, Ann. Phys. 148 (1983) 95.
[64] C. Panagiotakopoulos, A. Pilaftsis, Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 055003; D. J. Miller, R.
Nevzorov, hep-ph/0309143; D. J. Miller, S. Moretti, R. Nevzorov, to be published in
Proceedings to the 18th International Workshop on High-Energy Physics and Quan-
tum Field Theory (QFTHEP 2004) (hep-ph/0501139).
[65] H. E. Haber, M. Sher, Phys. Rev. D 35 (1987) 2206; M. Drees, Phys. Rev. D 35
(1987) 2910; D. Comelli and C. Verzegnassi, Phys. Lett. B 303 (1993) 277.
[66] M. Masip, R. Mu˜noz-Tapia, A. Pomarol, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 5340.
[67] H. E. Haber, R. Hempﬂing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 1815; Y. Okada, M. Yam-
aguchi, T. Yanagida, Prog. Theor. Phys. 85 (1991) 1; J. Ellis, G. Ridolﬁ, F. Zwirner,
Phys. Lett. B 257 (1991) 83; J. Ellis, G. Ridolﬁ, F. Zwirner, Phys. Lett. B 262
(1991) 477; R. Barbieri, M. Frigeni, F. Caravaglios, Phys. Lett. B 258 (1991) 167;
Y. Okada, M. Yamaguchi, T. Yanagida, Phys. Lett. B 262 (1991) 54; M. Drees, M.
Nojiri, Phys. Rev. D 45 (1992) 2482; D. M. Pierce, A. Papadopoulos, S. Johnson,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992) 3678; P. H. Chankowski, S. Pokorski, J. Rosiek, Phys.
Lett. B 274 (1992) 191; H. E. Haber, R. Hempﬂing, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 4280; P.
H. Chankowski, S. Pokorski, J. Rosiek, Nucl. Phys. B 423 (1994) 437; A. Yamada,
Z. Phys. C 61 (1994) 247; A. Dabelstein, Z. Phys. C 67 (1995) 495; D. M. Pierce, J.
A. Bagger, K. Matchev, R. Zhang, Nucl. Phys. B 491 (1997) 3.
[68] J. R. Espinosa, M. Quiros, Phys. Lett. B 266 (1991) 389; R. Hempﬂing, A. H. Hoang,
Phys. Lett. B 331 (1994) 99; M. Carena, J. R. Espinosa, M. Quiros, C. E. M. Wagner,
Phys. Lett. B 355 (1995) 209; J. A. Casas, J. R. Espinosa, M. Quiros, A. Riotto,
Nucl. Phys. B 436 (1995) 3; H. E. Haber, R. Hempﬂing, A. H. Hoang, Z. Phys. C 75
(1997) 539; S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, G. Weiglein, Phys. Rev. D 58 (1998) 091701;
S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, G. Weiglein, Phys. Lett. B 440 (1998) 296; R. Zhang,
Phys. Lett. B 447 (1999) 89; S. Heinemeyer, W. Hollik, G. Weiglein, Phys. Lett. B
455 (1999) 179.
[69] M. Carena, M. Quiros, C. E. M. Wagner, Nucl. Phys. B 461 (1996) 407.
[70] U. Ellwanger, C. Hugonie, Eur. Phys. J. C 25 (2002) 297.
[71] A. C. Kraan, hep-ex/0505002.
[72] S. Hesselbach, F. Franke, H. Fraas, Eur. Phys. J. C 23 (2002) 149.
83

=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
[73] T. Gherghetta, T. A. Kaeding, G. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 3178.
[74] J. Erler, P. Langacker, Phys. Lett. B 456 (1999) 68.
[75] K. Agashe, M. Graesser, I. Hinchliﬀe, M. Suzuki, Phys. Lett. B 385 (1996) 218; J.
Rosner, Phys. Lett. B 387 (1996) 113, A. Donini et al, Nucl. Phys. B 507 (1997) 51;
P. Frampton, M. Wise, B. Wright, Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 5820.
[76] A. D. Dolgov, Phys. Rept. 370 (2002) 333.
[77] M. Cvetiˇc, S. Godfrey, hep-ph/9504216; A. Leike, Phys. Rept. 317 (1999) 143; J.
Kang, P. Langacker, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 035014.
[78] M. Dittmar, A. Djouadi, A-S. Nicollerat, Phys. Lett. B 583 (2004) 111.
[79] P. Abreu et al. [DELPHI Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 446 (1999) 62; J. Breitweg
et al. [ZEUS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 052002; C. Adloﬀet al. [H1
Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 523 (2001) 234; G. Abbiendi et al. [OPAL Collab-
oration], Phys. Lett. B 526 (2002) 233; V. M. Abazov et al. [D0 Collaboration],
Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 071104; [CDF Collaboration], hep-ex/0506074.
[80] F. Abe et al. [CDF Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 5336 [Erratum-ibid.
78 (1997) 4307]; B. Abbott et al. [D0 Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (1998)
666.
[81] E. Ma, M. Raidal, U. Sarkar, Eur. Phys.
J. C 8 (1999) 301; E. Arik, O. Cakir,
S. A. Cetin, S. Sultansoy, JHEP 0209 (2002) 024.
84
