=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:hep-ph/0511256v2  5 Dec 2005
SHEP–05–35
Exceptional Supersymmetric Standard Model
S. F. King1, S. Moretti2, R. Nevzorov3 4
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, U.K.
Abstract
We discuss some phenomenological aspects of an E6 inspired supersymmetric stan-
dard model with an extra U(1)N gauge symmetry under which right-handed neutri-
nos have zero charge, allowing a conventional see-saw mechanism. The µ problem is
solved in a similar way to the NMSSM, but without the accompanying problems of
singlet tadpoles or domain walls. The above exceptional supersymmetric standard
model (ESSM) involves the low energy matter content of three 27 representations
of E6, which is broken at the GUT scale, and allows gauge coupling uniﬁcation due
to an additional pair of Higgs-like doublets. The ESSM predicts a Z′ boson and
exotic quarks which, if light enough, will provide spectacular new physics signals at
the LHC. We study the LHC phenomenology of the Z′ and extra quarks, including
their production and decay signatures particular to the ESSM. We also discuss the
two-loop upper bound on the mass of the lightest CP-even Higgs boson, and show
that it can be signiﬁcantly heavier than in either the MSSM or the NMSSM.
1E-mail: sfk@hep.phys.soton.ac.uk.
2E-mail: stefano@hep.phys.soton.ac.uk.
3E-mail: nevzorov@phys.soton.ac.uk.
4On leave of absence from the Theory Department, ITEP, Moscow, Russia.

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1.
Introduction
The minimal supersymmetric standard model (MSSM) provides a very attractive super-
symmetric extension of the standard model (SM) in which the superpotential contains
the bilinear term µHdHu, where Hd,u are the two Higgs doublets which develop vacuum
expectation values (VEVs) at the weak scale and µ is the supersymmetric Higgs mass pa-
rameter which can be present before SUSY is broken. However, despite its attractiveness,
the MSSM suﬀers from the µ problem: one would naturally expect µ to be either zero or
of the order of the Planck scale, while, in order to get the correct pattern of electroweak
symmetry breaking (EWSB), µ is required to be in the TeV range. The next-to-minimal
supersymmetric standard model (NMSSM) is an attempt to solve the µ problem of the
MSSM by generating the aforementioned term dynamically as the low energy VEV of a
singlet ﬁeld S via the interaction λSHdHu. In order to avoid a low energy global U(1)
symmetry, the superpotential is also supplemented by a trilinear term S3. However the
superpotential of the NMSSM remains invariant under a discrete Z3 symmetry which,
when broken at the weak scale, leads to the formation of domain walls in the early uni-
verse, which are inconsistent with modern cosmology. In an attempt to break the Z3
symmetry, operators suppressed by powers of the Planck scale could be introduced. But
these give rise to quadratically divergent tadpole contributions which would destabilize
the mass hierarchy. (For a review of the MSSM and NMSSM see e.g. [1].)
An elegant solution to the µ problem can emerge in the framework of ten dimen-
sional heterotic superstring theory based on E8 × E′
8 [2]. Compactiﬁcation of the ex-
tra dimensions results in the breakdown of E8 down to E6 or one of its subgroups in
the observable sector [3]. At the string scale, E6 can be broken directly to the rank-6
subgroup SU(3)C × SU(2)L × U(1)Y × U(1)ψ × U(1)χ via the Hosotani mechanism [4].
Two anomaly-free U(1)ψ and U(1)χ symmetries of the rank-6 model are deﬁned by [5]:
E6 →SO(10) × U(1)ψ, SO(10) →SU(5) × U(1)χ. In this article we explore a particular
E6 inspired supersymmetric model with one extra U(1)N gauge symmetry deﬁned by:
U(1)N = 1
4U(1)χ +
√
15
4 U(1)ψ ,
(1)
under which right-handed neutrinos have no charge and thus may gain large Majorana
masses in accordance with the see-saw mechanism (for a review see e.g.[6]). The extra
U(1)N gauge symmetry survives to low energies and serves to forbid an elementary µ
term as well as terms like Sn in the superpotential but allows the interaction λSHdHu.
After EWSB the scalar component of the singlet superﬁeld acquires a non-zero VEV,
⟨S⟩= s/
√
2, breaking U(1)N and an eﬀective µ = λs/
√
2 term is automatically generated.
Clearly there are no domain wall problems in such a model since there is no discrete Z3
symmetry, and instead of a global symmetry there is a gauged U(1)N. Anomalies are
1

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
cancelled by complete 27 representatations of E6 which survive to low energies, even
though E6 is broken at the GUT scale.
We refer to the model described above as the exceptional supersymmetric standard
model (ESSM). The ESSM thus represents a low energy alternative to the MSSM or
NMSSM, and provides a solution to the µ problem without domain wall problems. The
ESSM contains a rich phenomenology accessible to the LHC in the form of a Z′ plus three
families of exotic quarks and non-Higgs doublets. In a companion paper we have made a
comprehensive study of the theory and phenomenology of the ESSM [7]. The purpose of
this accompanying letter is to summarize the phenomenological highlights of our study,
including the two loop upper bound on the lightest CP-even Higgs mass, and the LHC
phenomenology of the Z′ and exotic quarks (including some new phenomenological results)
in a form that will be more easily accessible to our phenomenological and experimental
colleagues. For more details we refer the interested reader to the accompanying full length
paper [7]. Previously, the implications of SUSY models with an additional U(1)N gauge
symmetry had been studied in the context of leptogenesis [8], EW baryogenesis [9] and
neutrino physics [10]. Supersymmetric models with a U(1)N gauge symmetry under which
right-handed neutrinos are neutral have been speciﬁcally considered in [11] from the point
of view of Z −Z′ mixing and the neutralino sector, in [12] where a renormalization group
(RG) analysis was performed, and in [13] where a one-loop Higgs mass upper bound was
presented.
In the next section we brieﬂy review the ESSM. In sect.3 we analyse the upper bound
on the lightest CP-even Higgs boson mass including leading two-loop corrections. Then
in sect. 4 we discuss the phenomenology of some of the extra particles predicted by the
ESSM and analyze their production cross-sections and signatures at the LHC. Our results
are summarized in sect. 5.
2.
The ESSM
One of the most important issues in models with additional Abelian gauge symmetries is
the cancellation of anomalies. In E6 theories the anomalies are cancelled automatically.
Therefore any model based on E6 subgroups which contains complete representations
should be anomaly-free. Thus in order to ensure anomaly cancellation the particle con-
tent of the ESSM should include complete fundamental 27 representations of E6. These
multiplets decompose under the SU(5) × U(1)N subgroup of E6 [12] as follows:
27i →(10, 1)i + (5∗, 2)i + (5∗, −3)i + (5, −2)i + (1, 5)i + (1, 0)i .
(2)
The ﬁrst and second quantities in the brackets are the SU(5) representation and extra
U(1)N charge while i is a family index that runs from 1 to 3. An ordinary SM family
2

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
which contains the doublets of left-handed quarks Qi and leptons Li, right-handed up-
and down-quarks (uc
i and dc
i) as well as right-handed charged leptons, is assigned to
(10, 1)i + (5∗, 2)i. Right-handed neutrinos Nc
i should be associated with the last term in
Eq. (2) (1, 0)i. The next-to-last term in Eq. (2) (1, 5)i represents SM-type singlet ﬁelds
Si which carry non-zero U(1)N charges and therefore survive down to the EW scale. The
pair of SU(2)-doublets (H1i and H2i) that are contained in (5∗, −3)i and (5, −2)i have the
quantum numbers of Higgs doublets. Other components of these SU(5) multiplets form
color triplet of exotic quarks Di and Di with electric charges −1/3 and +1/3 respectively.
The matter content and correctly normalized Abelian charge assignment are in Tab. 1.
Q
uc
dc
L
ec
Nc
S
H2
H1
D
D
H′
H′
q
5
3QY
i
1
6
−2
3
1
3
−1
2
1
0
0
1
2
−1
2
−1
3
1
3
−1
2
1
2
√
40QN
i
1
1
2
2
1
0
5
−2
−3
−2
−3
2
−2
Table 1: The U(1)Y and U(1)N charges of matter ﬁelds in the ESSM, where QN
i
and QY
i
are
here deﬁned with the correct E6 normalization factor required for the RG analysis.
The most general renormalizable superpotential which is allowed by the E6 symmetry
can be written in the following form:
WE6
=
W0 + W1 + W2 ,
W0
=
λijkSi(H1jH2k) + κijkSi(DjDk) + hN
ijkNc
i (H2jLk) + hU
ijkuc
i(H2jQk)+
+hD
ijkdc
i(H1jQk) + hE
ijkec
i(H1jLk) ,
W1
=
gQ
ijkDi(QjQk) + gq
ijkDidc
juc
k ,
W2
=
gN
ijkNc
i Djdc
k + gE
ijkec
iDjuc
k + gD
ijk(QiLj)Dk .
(3)
Although B −L is conserved automatically, some Yukawa interactions in Eq. (3) violate
baryon number conservation resulting in rapid proton decay.
The baryon and lepton
number violating operators can be suppressed by imposing an appropriate Z2 symmetry
which is usually called R-parity. But the straightforward generalization of the deﬁnition
of R-parity, assuming BD = 1/3 and BD = −1/3, implies that W1 and W2 are forbidden
by this symmetry and the lightest exotic quark is stable. Models with stable charged
exotic particles are ruled out by diﬀerent experiments [14].
To prevent rapid proton decay in E6 supersymmetric models a generalized deﬁnition
of R-parity should be used.
There are two ways to do that.
If H1i, H2i, Si, Di, Di
and the quark superﬁelds (Qi, uc
i, dc
i) are even under a discrete ZL
2 symmetry while the
lepton superﬁelds (Li, ec
i, Nc
i ) are odd all terms in W2 are forbidden (Model I). Then
the remaining superpotential is invariant with respect to a U(1)B global symmetry if the
exotic quarks Di and Di are diquark and anti-diquark, i.e. BD = −2/3 and BD = 2/3.
3

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
An alternative possibility is to assume that the exotic quarks Di and Di as well as lepton
superﬁelds are all odd under ZB
2 whereas the others remain even. Then we get Model II
in which all Yukawa interactions in W1 are forbidden by the discrete ZB
2 symmetry. Here,
exotic quarks are leptoquarks. The two possible models are summarized as:
WESSM I = W0 + W1 ,
WESSM II = W0 + W2 .
(4)
In addition to the complete 27i representations some components of the extra 27′
and 27′ representations must survive to low energies in order to preserve gauge coupling
uniﬁcation. We assume that an additional SU(2) doublet components H′ of (5∗, 2) from
a 27′ and corresponding anti-doublet H
′ from 27′ survive to low energies.
In either model the superpotential involves a lot of new Yukawa couplings in compar-
ison to the SM. In general these new interactions induce non-diagonal ﬂavor transitions.
To suppress ﬂavor changing processes one can postulate a ZH
2
symmetry under which
all superﬁelds except one pair of H1i and H2i (say Hd ≡H13 and Hu ≡H23) and one
SM-type singlet ﬁeld S ≡S3 are odd. Then only one Higgs doublet Hd interacts with the
down-type quarks and charged leptons and only one Higgs doublet Hu couples to up-type
quarks while the couplings of all other exotic particles to ordinary quarks and leptons are
forbidden. This eliminates any problem related with non-diagonal ﬂavor transitions. The
SU(2) doublets Hu and Hd play the role of Higgs ﬁelds generating the masses of quarks
and leptons after EWSB. Thus it is natural to assume that only S, Hu and Hd acquire
non-zero VEVs.
The ZH
2 symmetry reduces the structure of the Yukawa interactions in (4):
WESSM I, II
−→
λiS(H1iH2i) + κiS(DiDi)+
+fαβSα(HdH2β) + ˜fαβSα(H1βHu) + WMSSM(µ = 0) ,
(5)
where α, β = 1, 2 and i = 1, 2, 3 . In Eq. (5) we choose the basis of H1α, H2α, Di and
Di so that the Yukawa couplings of the singlet ﬁeld S have ﬂavor diagonal structure.
Here we deﬁne λ ≡λ3 and κ ≡κ3. If λ or κi are large at the Grand Uniﬁcation scale
MX they aﬀect the evolution of the soft scalar mass m2
S of the singlet ﬁeld S rather
strongly resulting in negative values of m2
S at low energies that triggers the breakdown of
the U(1)N symmetry. To guarantee that only Hu, Hd and S acquire a VEV we impose a
certain hierarchy between the couplings H1i and H2i to the SM-type singlet superﬁelds Si:
λ ≫λ1,2, fαβ and ˜fαβ. Although λ1,2, fαβ and ˜fαβ are expected to be considerably smaller
than λ they must be large enough to generate suﬃciently large masses for the exotic
particles to avoid conﬂict with direct particle searches at present and former accelerators.
Keeping only Yukawa interactions whose couplings are allowed to be of order unity gives
approximately:
WESSM I, II ≈λS(HdHu) + κiS(DiDi) + ht(HuQ)tc + hb(HdQ)bc + hτ(HdL)τ c .
(6)
4

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
The ZH
2 symmetry discussed above forbids all terms in W1 or W2 that would allow
the exotic quarks to decay. Therefore the discrete ZH
2 symmetry can only be approximate
although ZB
2 or ZL
2 must be exact to prevent proton decay. In our model we allow only the
third family SU(2) doublets Hd and Hu to have Yukawa couplings to the ordinary quarks
and leptons of order unity. This is a self-consistent assumption since the large Yukawa
couplings of the third generation (in particular, the top-quark Yukawa coupling) provide
a radiative mechanism for generating the Higgs VEVs [15]. The Yukawa couplings of two
other pairs of SU(2) doublets H1i and H2i as well as H′ and exotic quarks to the quarks
and leptons of the third generation are supposed to be signiﬁcantly smaller (≲0.1) so
that none of the other exotic bosons gain VEVs. These couplings break the ZH
2 symmetry
explicitly resulting in ﬂavor changing neutral currents (FCNCs). In order to suppress the
contribution of new particles and interactions to K0 −K
0 oscillations and to the muon
decay channel µ →e−e+e−in accordance with experimental limits, it is necessary to
assume that the Yukawa couplings of new exotic particles to the quarks and leptons of
the ﬁrst and second generations are less than or of order 10−4.
3.
Upper bound on the lightest CP-even Higgs mass
As in the NMSSM, the ESSM Higgs sector includes two doublets Hu and Hd as well as
the SM-type singlet ﬁeld S. The interactions between them are deﬁned by the structure
of the gauge interactions and by Eq.(6). At the physical vacuum Higgs ﬁelds develop the
VEVs ⟨Hd⟩= vd
√
2, ⟨Hu⟩= vu
√
2 and ⟨S⟩=
s
√
2, thus breaking the SU(2)L×U(1)Y ×U(1)N
symmetry to U(1)EM, associated with electromagnetism. Instead of vd and vu it is more
convenient to use tan β = vu
vd
and v =
p
v2
d + v2
u, where v = 246 GeV. After the breakdown
of the gauge symmetry two CP-odd and two charged Goldstone modes in the Higgs sector
are absorbed by the Z, Z′ and W ± gauge bosons so that only six physical degrees of
freedom are left. They represent three CP-even (as in the NMSSM), and one CP-odd
and two charged Higgs states (as in the MSSM). However, unlike the MSSM or NMSSM,
there is an additional Z′, as well as exotic matter, as discussed in the next section.
SUSY models predict that the mass of the lightest Higgs particle is limited from above.
The ESSM is not an exception. When the soft masses of the superpartners of the top-
quark are equal, i.e. m2
Q = m2
U = M2
S, the two-loop upper bound on the lightest CP-even
Higgs boson mass mh in the ESSM can be written in the following form:
m2
h
≲
λ2
2 v2 sin2 2β + M2
Z cos2 2β + g
′2
1 v2

˜Q1 cos2 β + ˜Q2 sin2 β
2 
1 −3h2
t
8π2l

+
3h4
tv2 sin4 β
8π2
1
2Ut + l +
1
16π2
3
2h2
t −8g2
3

(Ut + l)l

,
(7)
5

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
where
Ut = 2 X2
t
M2
S

1 −1
12
X2
t
M2
S

,
l = ln
M2
S
m2
t

,
(8)
Xt is the usual stop mixing parameter, ¯g =
p
g2
2 + g′2, g′ =
p
3/5g1, whereas ˜Q1 and
˜Q2 are the U(1)N charges of Hd and Hu respectively. Here g2, g1 and g′
1 are the gauge
couplings of the SU(2)L, U(1)Y and U(1)N interactions. The couplings g2 and g′ are known
precisely. Thus, by assuming gauge coupling uniﬁcation one can determine the value of
the extra U(1)N gauge coupling. It turns out that g′
1(Q) ≃g1(Q) for any renormalization
scale Q smaller than the uniﬁcation one: Q ≲MX [7].
Eq. (7) is a simple generalization of the approximate expressions for the two-loop
theoretical restriction on the mass of the lightest Higgs particle obtained in the MSSM
[16] and NMSSM [17]. At tree level the upper limit on the mass of the lightest Higgs
particle is described by the sum of the three terms in the square brackets.
One-loop
corrections from the top-quark and its superpartners increase the bound on the lightest
CP-even Higgs boson mass in SUSY models substantially. The inclusion of leading two-
loop corrections reduces the upper limit on mh signiﬁcantly and nearly compensates the
growth of the theoretical restriction on mh with increasing SUSY breaking scale MS
which is caused by one-loop corrections. In order to enhance the contribution of loop
eﬀects we assume maximal mixing in the stop sector (i.e. Xt =
√
6MS). We also adopt
MS = 700 GeV. Then the theoretical restriction on the lightest Higgs mass (7) depends
on λ and tan β only. The requirement of validity of perturbation theory up to the Grand
Uniﬁcation scale constrains the parameter space further setting a limit on the Yukawa
coupling λ for each value of tan β. Relying on the results of the analysis of the RG ﬂow
in the ESSM presented in [7] one can obtain the maximum possible value of the lightest
Higgs scalar for each particular choice of tan β.
The dependence of the two-loop upper bound on the mass of the lightest Higgs particle
is examined in Fig. 1 where it is compared with the corresponding limits in the MSSM and
NMSSM. At moderate values of tan β (tan β = 1.6 −3.5) the upper limit on the lightest
Higgs boson mass in the ESSM is considerably higher than in the MSSM and NMSSM.
It reaches the maximum value ∼150 GeV at tan β = 1.5 −2. In the considered part of
the parameter space the theoretical restriction on the mass of the lightest CP-even Higgs
boson in the NMSSM exceeds the corresponding limit in the MSSM because of the extra
contribution to m2
h induced by the additional F-term in the Higgs scalar potential of the
NMSSM. The size of this contribution, which is described by the ﬁrst term in the square
brackets of Eq. (7), is determined by the Yukawa coupling λ. The upper limit on the
coupling λ caused by the validity of perturbation theory in the NMSSM is more stringent
than in the ESSM due to the presence of exotic 5 + 5-plets of matter in the particle
6

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
spectrum of the ESSM that leads to the growth of gi(Q) at high energies.
Since the
gi(Q) increase prevents the appearance of the Landau pole in the evolution of the Yukawa
couplings the maximum allowed λ(mt) value for each tan β is greater in the ESSM than in
the NMSSM. The increase of λ(mt) is thus accompanied by the growth of the theoretical
restriction on the mass of the lightest CP-even Higgs particle. This is the reason why
the upper limit of mh in the NMSSM is considerably less than in the ESSM at moderate
values of tan β.
mh
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
tan β
Figure 1: The dependence of the two-loop upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson mass on tan β
for mt(mt) = 165 GeV, m2
Q = m2
U = M2
S, Xt =
√
6MS and MS = 700 GeV. The solid, lower
and upper dotted lines represent the limit on mh in the MSSM, NMSSM and ESSM respectively.
At large tan β ≳10 the contribution of the F-term of the SM-type singlet ﬁeld to m2
h
vanishes. Therefore with increasing tan β the upper bound on the lightest Higgs boson
mass in the NMSSM approaches the corresponding limit in the MSSM. In the ESSM the
theoretical restriction on the mass of the lightest Higgs scalar also diminishes when tan β
rises. But even at very large values of tan β the upper limit on mh in the ESSM is still
4 −5 GeV larger than the ones in the MSSM and NMSSM because of the U(1)N D-term
contribution to mh (last term in the square brackets of Eq. (7)).
Note that the quoted upper limits for the ESSM, as well as the MSSM and NMSSM,
are sensitive to the value of the top-quark mass, the SUSY breaking scale and also depend
on the precise form of the two-loop approximations used. Here we have used an analytic
approximation of the two-loop eﬀects which slightly underestimates the full two-loop
corrections. The upper bounds quoted here may therefore be further increased by several
7

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
GeV. However the main point we wish to make is that the upper bound on the lightest
CP-even Higgs scalar in the ESSM is always signiﬁcantly larger than in the MSSM as well
as the NMSSM.
4.
Z′ and exotica phenomenology at the LHC
The presence of a relatively light Z′ or of exotic multiplets of matter permits to distinguish
the ESSM from the MSSM or NMSSM. Collider experiments [18] and precision EW tests
[19] imply that the Z′ is typically heavier than 500 −600 GeV while the mixing angle
between Z and Z′ is smaller than a few ×10−3. The analysis performed in [20] revealed
that a Z′ boson in E6 inspired models can be discovered at the LHC if its mass is less than
4 −4.5 TeV. At the same time the determination of the Z′ couplings should be possible
up to MZ′ ∼2 −2.5 TeV using Drell-Yan (DY) production [21].
Fig. 2 shows the diﬀerential distribution in invariant mass of the lepton pair l+l−(for
one species of lepton l = e, µ) in DY production at the LHC with and without light exotic
quarks with representative masses µDi = 250 GeV for all three generations and with
MZ′ = 1.2 TeV. This distribution is promptly measurable at the CERN collider with a
high resolution and would enable one to not only conﬁrm the existence of a Z′ state but
also to establish the possible presence of additional exotic matter, by simply ﬁtting to
the data the width of the Z′ resonance [21]. In order to perform such an exercise, the Z′
couplings to ordinary matter ought to have been previously established elsewhere, as a
modiﬁcation of the latter may well lead to eﬀects similar to those induced by our exotic
matter.
The exotic quarks can also be pair produced directly and decay with novel signatures.
In the ESSM the exotic quarks and squarks receive their masses from the large VEV of the
singlet S, according to the terms κiS(DiDi) in Eq. (6). Their couplings to the quarks and
leptons of the ﬁrst and second generation should be rather small, as previously discussed
in sect.2. The exotic quarks can be relatively light in the ESSM since their masses are set
by the Yukawa couplings κi and λi that may be small. This happens, for example, when
the Yukawa couplings of the exotic particles have hierarchical structure which is similar
to the one observed in the ordinary quark and lepton sectors. Since the exotic squarks
also receive soft masses from SUSY breaking, they are expected to be much heavier, and
their production cross-sections will be considerably smaller.
If exotic quarks of the nature described here do exist at low scales, they could possibly
be accessed through direct pair hadroproduction at the LHC. Fig. 3 shows the production
cross section of exotic quark pairs at the LHC as a function of the invariant mass of
the ﬁnal state. The lifetime and decay modes of these particles are determined by the
8

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Figure 2: Diﬀerential cross section in the ﬁnal state invariant mass, denoted by Ml+l−, at the
LHC for DY production (l = e or µ only) in presence of a Z′ with and without the (separate)
contribution of exotic D-quarks with µDi = 250 GeV for MZ′ = 1.2 TeV.
Figure 3: Cross section at the LHC for pair production of exotic D-quarks as a function of the
invariant mass of DD pair. Similar cross sections of tt and bb production are also included for
comparison.
operators that break the ZH
2 symmetry. If ZH
2 is only slightly broken then exotic quarks
may live for a long time. Then they will form bound states with ordinary quarks. It
means that at the LHC it may be possible to study the spectroscopy of new composite
9

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
scalar leptons or baryons. When ZH
2 is broken signiﬁcantly exotic quarks can also produce
a remarkable signature. Since according to our initial assumptions the ZH
2 symmetry is
mostly broken by the operators involving quarks and leptons of the third generation the
exotic quarks decay either via D →t + ˜b, D →b + ˜t , if the exotic quarks D are diquarks
or via D →t+ ˜τ, D →τ +˜t, D →b+ ˜ντ, D →ντ +˜b if they are are leptoquarks. Because
in general sfermions decay into corresponding fermion and neutralino one can expect that
each diquark will decay further into t- and b-quarks while a leptoquark will produce a
t-quark and a τ-lepton in the ﬁnal state with rather high probability.
As each t-quark decays into a b-quark whereas a τ-lepton gives one charged lepton l in
the ﬁnal state with a probability of 35%, both these scenarios would generate an excess
in the b-quark production cross section. In this respect SM data samples which should be
altered by the presence of exotic D-quarks are those involving t¯t production and decay
as well as direct b¯b production. For this reason, Fig. 3 shows the cross sections for these
two genuine SM processes alongside those for the exotica. Detailed LHC analyses will
be required to establish the feasibility of extracting the excess due to the light exotic
particles predicted by our model. However, Fig. 3 should clearly make the point that -
for the discussed parameter conﬁguration - one is in a favorable position in this respect,
as the decay BRs of the exotic objects are much larger than the expected four-body cross
section involving heavy quarks and/or leptons, as discussed in [7]. Thus the presence of
light exotic quarks in the particle spectrum could result in an appreciable enhancement of
the cross section of either pp →ttbb + X and pp →bbbb + X if exotic quarks are diquarks
or pp →ttl+l−+ X and pp →bbl+l−+ X if new quark states are leptoquarks.
5.
Conclusions
We have considered the ESSM deﬁned by a U(1)N gauge group extension of the SM under
which right-handed neutrinos are neutral, with anomalies cancelled by the low energy
matter content of three 27 representations of an E6 gauge group broken at the GUT
scale. In the ESSM the µ problem is solved in a similar way to the NMSSM, but without
the accompanying problems of singlet tadpoles or domain walls. The ESSM allows the
conventional see-saw mechanism, and gauge coupling uniﬁcation due to an additional pair
of Higgs-like doublets.
In this letter we have focussed on some interesting phenomenological aspects of the
model, with the full details given in an accompanying longer paper [7]. If the Z′ boson and
exotic quarks are light enough they will be visible at the LHC, providing spectacular new
physics signals. For example, the three extra families of exotic charge 1/3 quarks, which
must be either diquarks or leptoquarks to ensure baryon number conservation, may be
10

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
directly produced in pairs with decay signatures determined by the hierarchical structure
of the Yukawa interactions in the ESSM. The exotic quarks may decay into either a heavy
quark-antiquark pair Q ¯Q or a heavy quark and lepton pair Qτ(ντ) where Q is either b or
t quark. This would result in the growth of the cross section of either pp →QQ ¯Q ¯Q + X
or pp →l+l−Q ¯Q + X at the LHC.
We have also studied the Z′ which may be observed directly as a resonance in the
di-lepton invariant mass of DY events, and shown that the exotic quarks can make their
presence felt indirectly via a visible increase in the Z′ width. The extra matter also has
the indirect eﬀect of increasing the lightest CP-even Higgs boson mass. The point is that
extra exotic matter predicted by the ESSM changes the RG ﬂow of the gauge and Yukawa
couplings relaxing the restrictions on the Yukawa couplings coming from the validity of
perturbation theory up to the scale MX as compared with the MSSM and NMSSM. Larger
values of Yukawa couplings at the EW scale and the extra D-term contribution in the
Higgs potential both serve to increase the upper limit on the mass of the lightest CP-even
Higgs boson. We have shown that, in the leading two-loop approximation, the lightest
Higgs mass does not exceed about 150−155 GeV which is much higher than in the MSSM
or NMSSM.
The discovery of the Z′ and exotic quarks would provide a smoking gun signature of
the ESSM, providing circumstantial evidence for an underlying E6 gauge structure at the
GUT scale, and a window into string theory.
Acknowledgements: RN thanks E. Boos, D. I. Kazakov and M. I. Vysotsky for discus-
sions. The authors are grateful to A. Djouadi, J. Kalinowski, D. J. Miller and P. M. Zerwas
for comments and acknowledge support from the PPARC grant PPA/G/S/2003/00096,
the NATO grant PST.CLG.980066 and the EU network MRTN 2004-503369.
References
[1] D.J.H. Chung, L.L. Everett, G.L. Kane, S.F. King, J.D. Lykken, L.T. Wang, Phys. Rept.
407 (2005) 1.
[2] M.B.Green, J.H.Schwarz, E.Witten, ‘Superstring Theory’, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987.
[3] F. del Aguila, G.A. Blair, M. Daniel, G.G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B 272 (1986) 413.
[4] Y. Hosotani, Phys. Lett. B 129 (1983) 193.
[5] J.L. Hewett, T.G. Rizzo, Phys. Rept. 183 (1989) 193; M.Cvetiˇc, P. Langacker, Phys. Rev.
D 54 (1996) 3570; Mod. Phys. Lett. A 11 (1996) 1247; P. Langacker, J. Wang, Phys. Rev.
D 58 (1998) 115010.
[6] S.F. King, Rept. Prog. Phys. 67 (2004) 107.
[7] S.F. King, S. Moretti, R. Nevzorov, arXiv:hep-ph/0510419.
11

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
[8] T. Hambye, E. Ma, M. Raidal, U. Sarkar, Phys. Lett. B 512 (2001) 373.
[9] E. Ma, M. Raidal, J. Phys. G 28 (2002) 95.
[10] E. Ma, Phys. Lett. B 380 (1996) 286.
[11] E. Keith, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 3587; D. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 1738.
[12] E. Keith, E. Ma, Phys. Rev. D 56 (1997) 7155.
[13] Y. Daikoku, D. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 095006.
[14] J. Rich, M. Spiro, J. Lloyd-Owen, Phys. Rept. 151 (1987) 239; P.F. Smith, Contemp. Phys.
29 (1988) 159; T.K. Hemmick et al., Phys. Rev. D 41 (1990) 2074.
[15] L.E. Ib´a˜nez, G.G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 110 (1982) 215; J. Ellis, D.V. Nanopoulos, K. Tam-
vakis, Phys. Lett. B 121 (1983) 123; J. Ellis, J. Hagelin, D.V. Nanopoulos, K. Tamvakis,
Phys.Lett. B 125 (1983) 275; L. Alvarez-Gaum´e, J. Polchinski, M. Wise, Nucl.Phys. B 221
(1983) 495.
[16] M. Carena, M. Quiros, C.E.M. Wagner, Nucl. Phys. B 461 (1996) 407.
[17] U. Ellwanger, C. Hugonie, Eur. Phys. J. C 25 (2002) 297.
[18] F. Abe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 2192; P. Abreu et al., Phys. Lett. B 485 (2000)
45; R. Barate et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 12 (2000) 183.
[19] J. Erler, P. Langacker, Phys. Lett. B 456 (1999) 68.
[20] M. Cvetiˇc, S. Godfrey, hep-ph/9504216; A. Leike, Phys. Rept. 317 (1999) 143; J. Kang, P.
Langacker, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 035014.
[21] M. Dittmar, A. Djouadi, A.-S. Nicollerat, Phys. Lett. B 583 (2004) 111.
12
