PDF page 1
~ 
r . 
~ .. 
_.., .. 
. 
I -----" 
-, 
/"... 
ABSTRACT 
* 
FERMION QUANTUM NUMBERS IN KALUZA-KLElN THEORY 
Edward Witten 
Joseph Henry Laboratories 
Princeton University 
Princeton, New Jersey 08544 
October 1983 
The problem of obtaining left-right aaymmetry of fermion quantum 
numbers in Kaluza-Klein theory is discuased. 
In the absence of elementary 
gauge fields, a theorem by Atiyah and Hirzebruch states that the Dirac equa-
tion in 4+n dimensions always leads to vector-like fermion quantum numbers in 
four dimensions. 
The proof of this theorem is sketched. 
It is shown that 
the same holds for the Rarita-Schwinger operator on homogeneous spaces but a 
general impossibility theorem for the Rarita-Schwinger field is not proved. 
(However, in view of the apparent restriction of aupergravity to d < 11 this 
line of approach is severely constrained,) 
Also discussed are eome Kaluza-
Klein theories with elementary gauge fields, some difficulties in obtaining 
maealeas charged scalars, and some speculations about the cosmological con-
at ant. 
* Research supported i.n part by the National Science Foundation under grant 
No. PHYS0-19754. 
-2-
I. INTRODUCTION 
Kaluza-Klein theory 1 has recently attracted increasing interest as a 
program for unifying gauge interactions with gravity. 
This theory can be 
viewed 2 in terms of spontaneous SymQetry breaking, the compact and non-
compact dimensions being on an equal footing as far as the laws of nature are 
concerned, just as the photon and the massive vector $eSona are treated sym-
metrically in the standard weak interaction models. 
This simple observation 
is one of the chief reasons for the revived interest 3 in. Kaluza-Klein theory. 
One may start with a general relativistic theory in 4+n dimensions, and 
assume the grand state to be K~KB, where M~ ia four dimensional Minkowaki 
space and B is a compact apace. 
Continuous symmetries of a* will always be 
observed~ as gauge symmetries in the effective four dimensional world. 
The 
gauge fielda (which in general can be more numerous than the extra dimen-
sions) originate in the normd mode expansion of the flu'ctuationa in the 4+n 
dimensional metric tensor. 
For instance, starting in eleven or more dimen-
aione, one can ~.s obtain gauge fields of SU(3)l<SU(2)KU(l). 
Huch of thie 
paper will be devoted to the consequences of assuming that all observed gauge 
forces originate in this way, as part of the metric tensor, from a theory 
which originally had no elementary gauge fields. 
However, thia is not necea-
aarily the only attractive possibility. It might be equally attractive to 
start with a unified theory (perhapa a aupergravity 6 or auperatring 7 theory) 
that determines the original gauge group. 
(For instance, one of the n•2 
supergravity theories in ten dimensions requires the existence of a U(l) 
gauge field.) 
Our remarks in section VI will be relevant to such theories. 
* I.e., transformations that leave fixed both the geometry of Band the 
expectation values of any matter fields that may be present. 
