PAGE 1
arXiv:2107.03557v1  [math.HO]  8 Jul 2021
THE ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
DANIEL S. FREED
In memory of Michael Atiyah
Abstract. The Atiyah-Singer index theorem, a landmark achievement of the early 1960s, brings
together ideas in analysis, geometry, and topology. We recount some antecedents and motivations;
various forms of the theorem; and some of its implications, which extend to the present.
Contents
1. Introduction
2
2. Antecedents and motivations from algebraic geometry and topology
3
2.1. The Riemann-Roch theorem
3
2.2. Hirzebruch’s Riemann-Roch and Signature Theorems
4
2.3. Grothendieck’s Riemann-Roch theorem
6
2.4. Integrality theorems in topology
8
3. Antecedents in analysis
10
3.1. de Rham, Hodge, and Dolbeault
10
3.2. Elliptic diﬀerential operators and the Fredholm index
12
3.3. Index problems for elliptic operators
13
4. The index theorem and proofs
14
4.1. The Dirac operator
14
4.2. First proof: cobordism
16
4.3. Pseudodiﬀerential operators
17
4.4. A few applications
18
4.5. Second proof: K-theory
18
5. Variations on the theme
19
5.1. Equivariant index theorems
19
5.2. Index theorem on manifolds with boundary
21
5.3. Real elliptic operators
22
5.4. Index theorems for Cliﬀord linear operators
22
5.5. Families index theorem
24
5.6. Coverings and von Neumann algebras
25
6. Heat equation proof
26
6.1. Heat operators, zeta functions, and the index
27
6.2. The local index theorem
29
6.3. Postscript: Whence the ˆA-genus?
31
7. Geometric invariants of Dirac operators
32
7.1. The signature defect
33
7.2. Global boundary conditions
34
7.3. The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant
35
7.4. Secondary geometric invariants
36
7.5. Determinants of Dirac operators
38
Date: July 7, 2021.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number DMS-
2005286.
1

PAGE 2
2
D. S. FREED
8. Anomalies and index theory
41
8.1. Projectivity and symmetries in quantum mechanics
41
8.2. Spinor ﬁelds and anomalies in quantum ﬁeld theory
43
8.3. Topological ﬁeld theory and bordism
45
8.4. Synthesis
47
References
48
1. Introduction
Consider the Riemann sphere CP1 “ C Y t8u. Let tziuN
i“1 Ă CP1 be a ﬁnite set, and to each
i P t1, . . . , Nu suppose a nonzero integer ni is given. A classical problem asks for a meromorphic
function f with a zero or pole at each zi. If ni ą 0, then zi is a zero of multiplicity ni; if ni ă 0, then
zi is a pole of order |ni|. The solution is straightforward. Namely, fpzq “ c śpz ´ziqni is a rational
function, unique up to the constant c P Czt0u. In other words, now allowing f ” 0, the solutions
form a one-dimensional complex vector space. If we replace CP1 by a closed Riemann surface of
positive genus, then there is an obstruction to existence of a meromorphic function with speciﬁed
zeros and poles. For example, an elliptic curve can be realized as a quotient E “ C{pZ ` Zτq of the
complex line by the full lattice generated by 1, τ for some τ P C with Im τ ą 0. A meromorphic
function on E lifts to a doubly periodic function on C, and the single constraint on the zeros
and poles of a meromorphic function is ř nizi P Z ` Zτ. Proceeding from E to a general closed
Riemann surface X, we encounter more constraints. In fact, the constraints form a vector space
whose dimension is the genus of X, a topological invariant. Meromorphic functions are solutions
to the Cauchy-Riemann equation, a linear elliptic partial diﬀerential equation. The solutions and
obstructions to this elliptic PDE are “counted” via topology. In a more general form, this is the
classical Riemann-Roch theorem.
The Atiyah-Singer index theorem, formulated and proved in 1962–3, is a vast generalization to
arbitrary elliptic operators on compact manifolds of arbitrary dimension. The Fredholm index in
question is the dimension of the kernel minus the dimension of the cokernel of a linear elliptic
operator.
The Atiyah-Singer theorem computes the index in terms of topological invariants of
the operator and topological invariants of the underlying manifold. The theorem weaves together
concepts and results in algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, diﬀerential geometry, and linear
analysis; its ramiﬁcations go far beyond, in number theory, representation theory, operator alge-
bras, nonlinear analysis, and theoretical physics. Furthermore, index theory itself is a sprawling
enterprise. The basic Atiyah-Singer theorem spawned numerous generalizations and novel path-
ways. This paper—a tribute to Michael Atiyah—naturally focuses on aspects of his work and his
inﬂuence. Even thus restricted, we can only skim the surface of this rich story.
There are antecedents of the index theorem from algebraic geometry and topology on the one
hand, and from analysis on the other. We discuss these in turn in §2 and §3. The basic Atiyah-
Singer theorem is the subject of §4. The ﬁrst proof is based on cobordism and in broad outline
follows Hirzebruch’s proofs of his signature and Riemann-Roch theorems. The second proof is based
on K-theory; it is inspired by Grothendieck’s Riemann-Roch theorem. In §5 we take up some of

PAGE 3
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
3
the extensions and variations of the basic theorem. These include an equivariant index theorem,
the index theorem for parametrized families of operators, the index theorem for manifolds with
boundary, and a few more. At this point our exposition makes a transition from global topological
invariants of general linear elliptic operators to local geometric invariants of Dirac operators. Heat
equation methods are the subject of §6, the ﬁrst application being a local index theorem. New
geometric invariants of Dirac operators appear in §7. In §8 we turn to physics, which was Atiyah’s
focus after the mid 1980’s and which provided an unanticipated playground for the circle of ideas
surrounding the index theorem. We focus on anomalies in quantum theory, a subject to which
Atiyah and Singer made an early contribution.
Each section of this paper has more introductory material, which we recommend even to the
casual reader. Also, a lecture based on this paper may be viewed at [F1].
Michael had great mathematical and personal charisma. His writings capture his vibrancy, as
did his lectures, some of which are available online. He wrote many wonderful expository articles
about the index theorem, especially of the early period; you will enjoy perusing them.
I warmly thank Simon Donaldson, Charlie Reid, and Graeme Segal for their careful reading of
and comments on an earlier version.
2. Antecedents and motivations from algebraic geometry and topology
Enumerative problems in algebraic geometry often lead to integers that have a topological inter-
pretation. A classical example is the Riemann-Roch formula, which is our starting point in §2.1.
The higher dimensional generalization was taken up by Fritz Hirzebruch in the early 1950’s, as
we recount in §2.2. A few years later Alexander Grothendieck extended Hirzebruch’s theorem to
a relative version, that is, to proper maps of complex manifolds. In the process he introduced
K-theory for sheaves. His ideas, brieﬂy presented in §2.3, play a fundamental role in variations
of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem a decade later. More immediately, as Graeme Segal writes in
this volume [Seg4], Atiyah and Hirzebruch transported Grothendieck’s K-theory over to algebraic
topology. Raoul Bott’s computation of the stable homotopy groups of Lie groups, which took place
during the same period as Hirzebruch’s and Grothendieck’s work on the Riemann-Roch theorem, is
the cornerstone of their theory. Crucial for the index theorem are the resulting integrality theorems,
of which we mention a few in §2.4. This led to a question—Why is the ˆA-genus an integer for a spin
manifold?—which in early 1962 was the immediate catalyst for Atiyah and Singer’s collaboration.
2.1. The Riemann-Roch theorem
Let X be a smooth projective curve over C, i.e., a one-dimensional closed complex submanifold
of a complex projective space. A divisor D is a ﬁnite set of points on X with an integer ordxpDq
attached to each point x P D. A divisor determines a holomorphic line bundle on X; let LpDq denote
the space of holomorphic sections of this bundle. We can describe LpDq as the space of meromorphic
functions on X which have a pole of order ď ordxpDq at each x P X. A basic problem in the theory
of curves is: Compute the dimension of LpDq. While this is quite diﬃcult in general, there is a

PAGE 4
4
D. S. FREED
topological formula for dim LpDq ´ dim LpK ´ Dq, where K is a canonical divisor of X. (The zero
set of a holomorphic 1-form, weighted by the orders of the zeros, is a canonical divisor.)
Theorem 2.1 (Riemann-Roch). Let X be a smooth projective curve and let D be a divisor on X.
Then
(2.2)
dim LpDq ´ dim LpK ´ Dq “ degpDq ´ g ` 1.
Here g is the genus of the curve X, its fundamental topological invariant, which is deﬁned to be
1
2 rank H1pX; Zq. Also, degpDq “ ř ordxpDq is the sum of the integers which deﬁne the divisor D.
If degpDq ą 2g ´ 2, it can be shown that LpK ´ Dq “ 0, so that in that case (2.2) provides a
complete solution to the problem of computing dim LpDq. Theorem 2.1 is the classical Riemann-
Roch1 formula. The Atiyah-Singer index theorem is a vast generalization of (2.2), as we will see.
Let us immediately note one consequence of the Riemann-Roch formula. Take D “ O to be the
trivial divisor consisting of no points. Then LpOq is the space of constant functions and LpKq is the
space of holomorphic diﬀerentials. We deduce from (2.2) that the latter has dimension g. It follows
that g is an integer, i.e., rank H1pX; Zq is even. Therefore, one-half the Euler number EulerpXq is
an integer, our ﬁrst example of an integrality theorem. The proof is noteworthy: 1 ´ EulerpXq{2 is
an integer because it is the dimension of a vector space, namely LpKq.
In the last decade of the 19th century, Noether, Enriques, and Castelnuovo generalized the
Riemann-Roch inequality and equality to algebraic surfaces; see (2.4) below.
2.2. Hirzebruch’s Riemann-Roch and Signature Theorems
We skip far ahead to the years 1945–1954 and the work of young Hirzebruch, based on two
important developments in geometry. The ﬁrst, initiated by Leray, is the theory of sheaves. The
second are the results in Thom’s thesis, particularly those concerning bordism2 groups of smooth
manifolds. We state two of Hirzebruch’s main results, which are recounted in [H1].
Let X be a nonsingular projective variety of complex dimension n and V Ñ X a holomorphic
vector bundle.
(In our discussion of curves we used divisors; recall that a divisor determines
a holomorphic line bundle, which makes the link to our formulation here.) Then the cohomology
groups HqpX, V q are deﬁned via sheaf theory: H0pX, V q is the vector space of holomorphic sections
of V Ñ X, and HqpX, V q for q ě 1 are derived from resolutions of the sheaf of holomorphic sections
of V Ñ X. The cohomology groups are ﬁnite dimensional, which can be proved using the theory
of elliptic diﬀerential operators and Dolbeault’s theorem. (See §§3.1–3.2.) The Euler characteristic
is deﬁned as the alternating sum
(2.3)
χpX, V q “
nÿ
q“0
p´1qq dim HqpX, V q.
1Riemann [Ri] proved the inequality dim LpDq ě degpDq´g`1, and then Roch [Ro] proved the more precise (2.2).
Sadly, Roch died of tuberculosis at the age of 26, just months after the 39 year-old Riemann succumbed to tuberculosis.
2Thom, Hirzebruch, and many others use ‘cobordism’ in place of ‘bordism’; Atiyah [A10] clariﬁed the relationship.

PAGE 5
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
5
As for the case n “ 1 of Riemann surfaces, one often wants to compute dim H0pX, V q, but in
general dim H0pX, V q depends on more than topological data. On the other hand, the Euler char-
acteristic χpX, V q does have a topological formula in terms of the Chern classes cjpXq and ckpV q.
The special case dim X “ rank V “ 1 is the classical Riemann-Roch formula (2.2). For X a smooth
projective algebraic surface (n “ 2) and V Ñ X the trivial bundle of rank 1, the result is commonly
known as Noether’s formula:
(2.4)
χpXq “ 1
12
`
c2
1pXq ` c2pXq
˘
rXs.
In (2.4) the Chern classes are evaluated on the fundamental class of X given by the natural orien-
tation. The presence of 12 in the denominator gives an integrality theorem for the Chern numbers
of a projective surface.
The solution to the Riemann-Roch problem for all X, V —that is, the computation of (2.3)—is
one of Hirzebruch’s signal achievements. Hirzebruch’s formula is expressed in terms of the Todd
polynomials and the Chern character. Suppose that the tangent bundle TX “ L1 ‘ ¨ ¨ ¨ ‘ Ln splits
as a sum of line bundles, and set yi “ c1pLiq P H2pX; Zq. Then the Todd class is
(2.5)
ToddpXq “
n
ź
i“1
yi
1 ´ e´yi .
This is a cohomology class of (mixed) even degree. Similarly, if V “ K1 ‘ ¨ ¨ ¨ ‘ Kr is a sum of line
bundles, with xi “ c1pKiq, then the Chern character is
(2.6)
chpV q “
rÿ
i“1
exi.
The splitting principle in the theory of characteristic classes allows us to extend these deﬁnitions
to TX Ñ X and V Ñ X which are not sums of line bundles.
Theorem 2.7 (Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch). Let X be a projective complex manifold and let V Ñ X
be a holomorphic vector bundle. Then
(2.8)
χpX, V q “ ToddpXq chpV qrXs.
Hirzebruch’s second main theorem, which is a step in the proof of Theorem 2.7, is now called
Hirzebruch’s Signature Theorem. Let X be a closed oriented real diﬀerentiable manifold of dimen-
sion 4k for some positive integer k. Then there is a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear pairing on the
middle cohomology H2kpX; Rq given by the cup product followed by evaluation on the fundamental
class:
(2.9)
H2kpX; Rq b H2kpX; Rq ÝÑ
R
α1
b
α2
ÞÝÑ pα1 ⌣α2qrXs

PAGE 6
6
D. S. FREED
The signature SignpXq of this pairing is called the signature of X. (The term ‘index’ is used in
place of ‘signature’ in older literature.) Hirzebruch deﬁnes the L-class as the polynomial in the
Pontrjagin classes of X determined by the formal expression
(2.10)
LpXq “
2k
ź
i“1
yi
tanh yi
,
where yi, ´yi are the Chern roots of the complexiﬁed tangent bundle.3 This is analogous to (2.5):
one ﬁrst deﬁnes LpXq in case TX b C Ñ X splits as a sum of complex line bundles.
Theorem 2.11 (Hirzebruch Signature Theorem). The signature of a closed oriented smooth man-
ifold X is
(2.12)
SignpXq “ LpXqrXs.
Hirzebruch’s proof uses Thom’s bordism theory [T1] in an essential way. Both sides of (2.12) are
invariant under oriented bordism and are multiplicative; for the signature, the former is a theorem
of Thom [T2, §IV]. Therefore, it suﬃces to verify (2.12) on a set of generators of the (rational)
oriented bordism ring, which had been computed by Thom.
The even projective spaces CP2n
provide a convenient set of generators, and the proof concludes with the observation that the L-
class is characterized as evaluating to 1 on these generators. The Todd class enters the proof of
Theorem 2.7 in a similar manner—its value on all projective spaces CPn is 1 and it is characterized
by this property.
2.3. Grothendieck’s Riemann-Roch theorem
The Riemann-Roch-Hirzebruch theorem was extended in a new direction by Grothendieck [BS]
in 1957. A decisive step was Grothendieck’s introduction of K-theory in algebraic geometry. Let
X be a smooth algebraic variety. Deﬁne KpXq as the free abelian group generated by coherent
algebraic sheaves on X, modulo the equivalence F „ F1 ` F2 if there is a short exact sequence
0 Ñ F1 Ñ F Ñ F2 Ñ 0. One can replace ‘coherent algebraic sheaves’ by ‘holomorphic vector
bundles’ in this deﬁnition, and one fundamental result is that the group KpXq is unchanged. Thus
Chern classes and the Chern character are deﬁned for elements of KpXq. (Grothendieck reﬁnes
these to take values in the Chow ring of X.) If f : X Ñ Y is a morphism of varieties, and F a
sheaf over X, then Rqf˚pFq is the sheaf on Y associated to the presheaf U ÞÑ Hqpf ´1pUq, Fq. The
assignment
(2.13)
f! : F ÞÝÑ
ÿ
p´1qqRqf˚pFq P KpY q
extends to a homomorphism of abelian groups f!: KpXq ÝÑ KpY q, as can be seen from the long
exact sequence in sheaf cohomology.
Now let f : X Ñ Y be a proper morphism between nonsingular irreducible quasiprojective vari-
eties. There is a pushforward f˚ in cohomology (or on the Chow rings).
3The total Pontrjagin class ppXq “ 1 ` p1pXq ` p2pXq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ is deﬁned by the expression śp1 ` y2
i q.

PAGE 7
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
7
Theorem 2.14 (Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch). For z P KpXq we have
(2.15)
ToddpY q ch
`
f!pzq
˘
“ f˚
`
ToddpXq chpzq
˘
.
This reduces to Hirzebruch’s Theorem 2.7 upon taking Y to be a point and z the K-theory class
of a holomorphic vector bundle.
One route to the Todd class is the special case in which f : X Ñ Y is the inclusion of a divisor
and z is the class of the structure sheaf OX. Then Rqf˚pOXq “ 0 for q ě 1 and R0f˚pOXq is
OX extended by zero to Y . Let L Ñ Y be the line bundle deﬁned by the divisor X. Observe that
f ˚pLq Ñ X is the normal bundle to X in Y . The exact sequence of sheaves
(2.16)
0 ÝÑ L´1 ÝÑ OY ÝÑ f!OX ÝÑ 0
leads to the equality
(2.17)
f!OX “ OY ´ L´1
in KpY q. Set y “ c1pLq. Then from (2.17),
(2.18)
ch
`
f!pOXq
˘
“ 1 ´ e´y.
On the other hand
(2.19)
f˚
`
chpOXq
˘
“ f˚p1q “ y.
Thus f˚ ˝ ch “ ch ˝f! up to the Todd class of L. To check Theorem 2.14 in this case, rewrite (2.15)
using the exact sequence
(2.20)
0 ÝÑ TX ÝÑ f ˚TY ÝÑ f ˚L ÝÑ 0
of vector bundles on X and the multiplicativity of the Todd genus:
ch
`
f!pzq
˘
“ f˚
ˆ ToddpXq
f ˚ ToddpY q chpzq
˙
“ f˚
ˆ
1
f ˚ ToddpLq chpzq
˙
“
1
ToddpLq f˚
`
chpzq
˘
.
(2.21)
This is what we checked in (2.18) and (2.19) for z “ rOXs.

PAGE 8
8
D. S. FREED
It is instructive at this stage to consider the inclusion of the zero section f : X Ñ E in a rank k
vector bundle π: E Ñ X. Then the sheaf f!OX “ R0f˚OX ﬁts into the exact sequence
(2.22)
0 ÝÑ π˚ŹkE˚ ÝÑ π˚Źk´1E˚ ÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨ ÝÑ π˚E˚ ÝÑ OE ÝÑ f!OX ÝÑ 0
of sheaves over E.
(Compare (2.16).)
Here E˚ is the (sheaf of sections of the) dual bundle
to π: E Ñ X, and the arrows in (2.22) at e P E are contraction by e. Thus in KpEq we have
(2.23)
f!pOXq “ Ź‚pE˚q,
where Ź‚pE˚q “ řp´1qkŹkE˚ in K-theory. Note that π: E Ñ X is the normal bundle to X in E.
2.4. Integrality theorems in topology
One consequence of the Riemann-Roch-Hirzebruch Theorem 2.7 is that the characteristic number
on the right hand side of (2.8), which a priori is a rational number, is actually an integer. This
integer is identiﬁed as a sum and diﬀerence of dimensions of vector spaces by the left hand side.
On the other hand, the right hand side is deﬁned for any almost complex manifold. Hirzebruch was
led to ask (as early as 1954) whether the Todd genus ToddpXqrXs of an almost complex manifold
(much less a non-algebraic complex manifold) is an integer [H3]. He also asked analogous questions
for real manifolds. Deﬁne the ˆA-class4 of a real manifold X4k by the formal expression
(2.24)
ˆApXq “
2k
ź
i“1
yi{2
sinh yi{2,
where yi are the Chern roots. This is a polynomial in the Pontrjagin classes. Then the Todd class
of an almost complex manifold can be expressed as
(2.25)
ToddpXq “ ec1pXq{2 ˆApXq.
In particular, ToddpXq depends only on the Pontrjagin classes and the ﬁrst Chern class.
It is
reasonable to speculate that it was (2.25) which motivated Hirzebruch to introduce the ˆA-class.
Furthermore, since the second Stiefel-Whitney class w2 is the mod 2 reduction of c1, Hirzebruch
asked: if a real manifold X4k has w2pXq “ 0, i.e., if X is a spin manifold, then is ˆApXqrXs an
integer?5 This was proved true (initially up to a power of 2 in [BH2]) by Borel and Hirzebruch [BH3]
in the late 1950’s using results of Milnor on cobordism [Mi1].
The integrality proved, the obvious question presented itself:
(2.26)
What is the integer ˆApXqrXs?
4Hirzebruch had previously deﬁned an A-class which diﬀers from the ˆA-class by a power of 2, hence the notation ˆA.
5In [H3] Hirzebruch only asks a less sharp divisibility question (Problem 7 of that paper). The more precise form
came later, along with the more general question: If a closed real manifold X admits an element c P H2pX; Zq whose
reduction mod 2 is w2pXq, and ToddpXq is deﬁned by (2.25) (with c replacing c1pXq), then is ToddpXqrXs an integer?

PAGE 9
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
9
A ﬁrst answer to this question came from within algebraic topology, though not from tra-
ditional Eilenberg-MacLane cohomology theory.
When Atiyah and Hirzebruch learned about
Grothendieck’s work, they immediately set out to investigate possible ramiﬁcations in topology.
The ﬁrst step was to deﬁne K-theory for arbitrary CW complexes X [AH1]. The deﬁnition is as
for algebraic varieties, but with ‘topological vector bundles’ replacing ‘coherent algebraic sheaves.’
The basic building blocks of topology are the spheres, and the calculation of KpSnq quickly reduces
to that of the stable homotopy groups of the unitary group. By a fortunate coincidence Bott had
just computed (in 1957) these homotopy groups [B1], [B2]. His periodicity theorem became the
cornerstone of the new topological K-theory. What results is a cohomology theory which satisﬁes
all of the Eilenberg-MacLane axioms save one, the dimension axiom. Thus was born “extraordinary
cohomology.” K-theory is the subject of Graeme Segal’s paper in this volume [Seg4].
Returning to the Grothendieck program, Atiyah and Hirzebruch formulated a version of Riemann-
Roch for smooth manifolds [AH2], [H2]. Let f : X Ñ Y be a smooth map between diﬀerentiable
manifolds, and suppose f is ‘oriented’ in the sense that there exists an element c P H2pX; Zq with
(2.27)
c ” w2pXq ´ f ˚w2pY q
pmod 2q.
Recall that Grothendieck’s theorem (2.15) is stated in terms of a map f!: KpXq Ñ KpY q. In the
topological category we cannot push forward vector bundles, as we could sheaves in the algebraic
category, so a new construction is needed.6 Here we restrict our attention to embeddings of complex
manifolds to simplify the presentation.7 Then (2.17) and (2.23) motivate the deﬁnition of f!. Let
π: E Ñ X be the normal bundle of X in Y .
By the tubular neighborhood theorem, we can
identify E with a neighborhood U of X in Y . The Thom complex Ź‚E˚ Ñ E is deﬁned on the
total space of E by contraction (compare (2.22)):
(2.28)
0 ÝÑ π˚ŹkE˚
ιpeq
ÝÝÝÝÑ π˚Źk´1E˚ ÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨ ÝÑ π˚E˚
ιpeq
ÝÝÝÝÑ E ˆ C ÝÑ 0.
Notice that (2.28) is exact for e ­“ 0, so the resulting K-theory element is supported on X. By
the tubular neighborhood theorem it is also deﬁned on U, and extension by zero yields the desired
element f!p1q P KpY q. If V Ñ X is a vector bundle, then f!pV q is deﬁned by tensoring (2.28)
with π˚V .
The Atiyah-Hirzebruch Riemann-Roch theorem for smooth manifolds states
(2.29)
ch
`
f!pzq
˘
ToddpY q “ f˚
`
chpzq ToddpXq
˘
,
z P KpXq.
Once f! is deﬁned, the proof is an exercise that compares Thom isomorphisms in K-theory and
cohomology. Specialize now to Y “ pt, and suppose w2pXq “ 0. Choose the orientation class c P
6The deﬁnition of f! was not given in the original paper [AH2]; missing was the Thom class in K-theory, which
is closely related to the symbol of the Dirac operator. The Dirac operator enters the story in the collaboration of
Atiyah and Singer (§4.1), and then the K-theory Thom class and Thom isomorphism appear in [ABS, §12]. See also
the discussion in [Seg4, §1].
7General case: Embed a closed manifold X in a sphere, and so factor an arbitrary map f : X Ñ Y into an
embedding followed by a projection: the composition X Ñ SN ˆ Y Ñ Y . Bott Periodicity calculates the “shriek
map” KpSN ˆ Y q Ñ KpY q. For embeddings of real manifolds (with an orientation of the normal bundle) Cliﬀord
multiplication on spinors replaces (2.28).

PAGE 10
10
D. S. FREED
H2pX; Zq to be zero. Then for z “ 0 in (2.29) we deduce, in view of (2.25), that ˆApXqrXs “
f!p1q P Kpptq – Z is an integer. This argument by Atiyah-Hirzebruch provided a new proof of the
integrality theorem for ˆA, and also a topological interpretation of the integer ˆApXqrXs, so a ﬁrst
answer to (2.26).
Still, that explanation was not considered satisfactory. As reported by Atiyah [A1], Hirzebruch
realized that the signature is the diﬀerence in dimensions of spaces of harmonic diﬀerential forms,
and he asked for a similar analytic interpretation of the ˆA-genus ˆApXqrXs. Thus when Singer
arrived for a sabbatical stay in Oxford in January, 1962, the ﬁrst question Atiyah asked him was,
“Why is the A-roof genus an integer for a spin manifold?” Singer [S1] responded, “Michael, why
are you asking me that question? You know the answer to that.” But Atiyah was looking for
something deeper, and he immediately had Singer hooked. By March the duo was in possession
of the Dirac operator and the index formula. Then, nine months after that initial conversation,
Atiyah and Singer completed the ﬁrst proof of their eponymous index theorem.
3. Antecedents in analysis
The Atiyah-Singer index theorem brings the worlds of algebraic geometry and algebraic topology
together with the worlds of diﬀerential geometry and global analysis. Our introduction to the latter
in §3.1 begins with foundational theorems about harmonic diﬀerential forms and their relationship
to cohomology. Geometric elliptic diﬀerential operators on Riemannian manifolds play a central
role. We take up more general elliptic operators in §3.2, where we also recall basic facts about
Fredholm operators. The Fredholm index, an integer-valued deformation invariant of a Fredholm
operator, is the eponymous character of index theory. In §3.3 we give the reader an inkling of the
activity around indices of elliptic operators during the years 1920–1963.
3.1. de Rham, Hodge, and Dolbeault
We begin with the de Rham and Hodge theorems, which exemplify the relationship between
elliptic linear diﬀerential equations and topology. Let X be a smooth n-dimensional manifold, and
consider the complex of diﬀerential forms
(3.1)
Ω0pXq
d
ÝÝÑ Ω1pXq
d
ÝÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨
d
ÝÝÑ ΩnpXq,
where d is the exterior derivative of Elie Cartan. The de Rham cohomology vector spaces are
deﬁned as the quotients
(3.2)
Hq
DRpXq “
ker rd: ΩqpXq Ñ Ωq`1pXqs
image rd: Ωq´1pXq Ñ ΩqpXqs,
0 ď q ď n.
The theorem de Rham proved in his 1931 thesis [deR] states that for each q there is a natural
isomorphism Hq
DRpXq
–
ÝÝÑ HqpX; Rq of the de Rham cohomology with real cohomology deﬁned

PAGE 11
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
11
via singular cochains. (This is modern language; de Rham proved that there is a closed form with
speciﬁed periods, unique modulo exact forms.) Notice that Hq
DRpXq is deﬁned using a diﬀerential
operator, whereas HqpX; Rq comes from topology.
Hodge, motivated by questions in algebraic
geometry, proved that on a closed Riemannian manifold there is a unique “best” form in each co-
homology class. Namely, on an oriented Riemannian manifold X Hodge deﬁned a duality operation
˚: ΩqpXq Ñ Ωn´qpXq, and for closed manifolds he argued [Hod] that in each de Rham cohomology
class there is a unique form ω satisfying
(3.3)
dω “ 0,
dp˚ωq “ 0.
These harmonic diﬀerential forms are solutions to the elliptic Hodge-Laplace equation
(3.4)
∆ω “ pdd˚ ` d˚dqω “ 0,
which on a closed manifold is equivalent to the pair of equations (3.3). The number of linearly
independent solutions—the dimension of the vector space HqpXq of solutions—equals a topolog-
ical invariant, the Betti number bq “ dim HqpX; Rq. There is a stronger statement, namely an
isomorphism HqpXq
–
ÝÝÑ HqpX; Rq. Neither statement generalizes to arbitrary elliptic diﬀerential
operators; rather, the index theorem in this situation computes the alternating sum of dimensions
of spaces of harmonic forms, a familiar topological invariant:
(3.5)
nÿ
q“0
p´1qq dim HqpXq “ EulerpXq,
where EulerpXq is the Euler number of X. (Compare (2.3).)
We can express the left hand side of (3.5) as the index of an elliptic operator, namely
(3.6)
d ` d˚ : ΩevenpXq ÝÑ ΩoddpXq.
Its formal adjoint is d ` d˚ : ΩoddpXq Ñ ΩevenpXq, and we identify the cokernel of (3.6) with the
kernel of the adjoint. If dim X is even, then a diﬀerent Z{2Z-grading8 on complex diﬀerential forms
Ω‚pX, Cq leads to another elliptic operator [AS3, §6]
(3.7)
d ` d˚ : Ω`pX, Cq ÝÑ Ω´pX, Cq,
the signature operator, whose index on a closed manifold of dimension divisible by 4 is the signature
of the pairing (2.9).
Let X be a closed n-dimensional complex manifold and V Ñ X a holomorphic vector bundle.
Then the sheaf cohomology groups HqpX, V q used in §2.2 are isomorphic to the cohomology groups
of the B-complex
(3.8)
Ω0,0pX, V q
B
ÝÝÑ Ω0,1pX, V q
B
ÝÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨
B
ÝÝÑ Ω0,npX, V q,
8The grading Ω‚pX, Cq “ Ω`pX, Cq ‘ Ω´pX, Cq is the eigenspace decomposition of the involution τ on Ω‚pX, Cq
deﬁned by τpωq “ ippp´1q`ℓ˚ ω, where dim X “ 2ℓ.

PAGE 12
12
D. S. FREED
as was proved by Dolbeault. If dim X “ 1 then (3.8) reduces to a single elliptic operator, and for
V Ñ X the line bundle associated to a divisor D on X the vector space LpDq of §2.1 is naturally
isomorphic to the kernel of B.
If X is K¨ahler, then Hodge theory implies that the Dolbeault
cohomology vector spaces are isomorphic to vector spaces of complex harmonic diﬀerential forms.
Putting these theorems together, we deduce that on a K¨ahler manifold the holomorphic Euler
characteristic (2.3) is the alternating sum of dimensions of spaces of harmonic forms. Hirzebruch’s
Riemann-Roch Theorem 2.7 is a topological formula for this analytic quantity:
(3.9)
n
ÿ
q“0
dim H0,qpXq “ χpX, V q “ ToddpXq chpV qrXs.
As mentioned at the end of §2, the Signature Theorem can also be interpreted in terms of harmonic
diﬀerential forms.
3.2. Elliptic diﬀerential operators and the Fredholm index
We set up the index problem on a closed n-manifold X. Let E0, E1 Ñ X be vector bundles
over X, and suppose P : C8pX, E0q Ñ C8pX, E1q is a linear diﬀerential operator of order m. In
local coordinates x1, . . . , xn on X, for u P C8pX, E0q a smooth section of E0 Ñ X we have
(3.10)
Pu “ ai1i2...im
Bmu
Bxi1Bxi2 ¨ ¨ ¨ Bxim ` lower order terms,
where ai1i2¨¨¨im is a bundle map E0 Ñ E1 depending symmetrically on the ij, and we sum over the
indices 1 ď ij ď n. This highest order term transforms as a tensor under coordinate changes, so it
deﬁnes a global bundle map
(3.11)
σpPq: SymmpT ˚Xq b E0 ÝÑ E1,
called the symbol of P. View σpPq as a homogeneous polynomial of degree m in T ˚X with values
in HompE0, E1q. The diﬀerential operator P is elliptic if its symbol is invertible; that is, if for each
x P X and nonzero θ P T ˚
x X, the linear map σpPqpθ, . . . , θq: E0
x Ñ E1
x is invertible. It follows from
elliptic theory that P has ﬁnite dimensional kernel and cokernel. (This relies on the compactness
of X.) The (Fredholm) index of P is
(3.12)
ind P “ dim ker P ´ dim coker P.
Elliptic theory proves that the extension of P to appropriate Sobolev spaces is a Fredholm
operator. Recall that a Fredholm operator H0 Ñ H1 is a bounded linear operator between Hilbert
spaces which has closed range, ﬁnite dimensional kernel, and ﬁnite dimensional cokernel. (The
deﬁnition generalizes to Banach spaces and beyond.) The index of a Fredholm operator is deﬁned9
9A linear map T : V 0 Ñ V 1 between ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces is an element of pV 1qb pV 0q˚, so it stands to
reason that the sign in (3.12) should have been the opposite: the dual—or minus—is the domain, not the codomain.
The usual sign convention causes headaches down the road, for example in the theory of determinants. On the other
hand, one could argue for the usual sign convention by rewriting a single operator as a 2-term complex in degrees 0
and 1, and then the usual sign for the index (as in (2.3)) reduce to (3.12).

PAGE 13
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
13
by (3.12). The space HompH0, H1q of continuous linear maps has a Banach space structure deﬁned
by the operator norm, and the open subspace FredpH0, H1q Ă HompH0, H1q of Fredholm operators
has nontrivial homotopy groups of unbounded degree. In particular, the index
(3.13)
ind: π0 FredpH0, H1q ÝÑ Z
is an isomorphism. In other words, the numerical index is a complete deformation invariant of a
single Fredholm operator. Furthermore, the action of compact operators by translation preserves
the subspace of Fredholm operators, hence the index is invariant under this translation.
Elliptic theory implies that the lower order terms of an elliptic diﬀerential operator (3.10) on
a smooth manifold are compact relative to the highest order term, which is essentially the sym-
bol (3.11). It follows that the index of an elliptic diﬀerential operator is an invariant of its sym-
bol. Furthermore, a continuous path of elliptic diﬀerential operators induces a continuous path of
Fredholm operators and of symbols (in suitable topologies). The index is unchanged under such
deformations and, in fact, only depends on the homotopy class of the symbol. The Atiyah-Singer
index theorem provides a formula for the index in terms of the homotopy class of the symbol.
3.3. Index problems for elliptic operators
There is a long and rich history of index theorems for linear elliptic problems in the ﬁrst half
of the 20th century. Many are subsumed by the Atiyah-Singer index theorem and its extension to
manifolds with boundary (§5.2). The articles by Agranovich [Agr] and Seeley [Se1] are excellent
guides to this history. The ﬁrst index theorem is contained in a 1920 paper of Fritz Noether [N].
(This is credited in modern references such as [E, AM].) Moreover, this paper seems to be the
origin of the Fredholm index.
In fact, in the older literature the following terminology that is
sometimes used: a linear operator is said to obey the ‘Noether property’ if it is Fredholm, in
which case ‘Fredholm’ is reserved for an operator of index zero (which then satisﬁes the “Fredholm
alternative”).
One case of Noether’s work is an index formula for Toeplitz operators.
Let S1 Ă C be the
unit circle and f : S1 Ñ Cˆ a smooth nonzero complex-valued function. The Toeplitz operator
Tf : H Ñ H is deﬁned on the Hilbert space H of L2 holomorphic functions on the closure Ωof the
unit disk ΩĂ C. By Fourier series H sits as a subspace in rH “ L2pS1, Cq. Let i: H ãÑ rH be the
inclusion and π: rH ։ H the orthogonal projection. Then Tf “ π ˝ Mf ˝ i is the compression of
the multiplication operator Mf : rH Ñ rH to H.
Theorem 3.14 (Noether, 1920). Tf is Fredholm with index minus the winding number of f.
The reader may wish to compute the index explicitly for fnpzq “ zn, n P Z. Theorem 3.14 was re-
discovered by Gohberg-Krein [GK], and there are index theorems for Toeplitz operators in arbitrary
dimensions, for example in Boutet de Monvel [BdM].
In 1960, Gelfand [G] observed that the index is a homotopy invariant, and he posed the general
problem of computing a topological formula for the index. It seems that Atiyah and Singer were
unaware of these events in Russia when they embarked on the journey which led to the index
theorem, though they became aware of them during a visit by Smale to Oxford [A1]. Gelfand’s

PAGE 14
14
D. S. FREED
paper, and some of its antecedents which solve special cases of the index problem, are cited at the
beginning of the Atiyah-Singer announcement of their general index theorem [AS1].
4. The index theorem and proofs
We arrive at the Atiyah-Singer index theorem for a single elliptic operator. It was announced
in [AS1] in 1963. Atiyah-Singer’s ﬁrst proof (§4.2), modeled on Hirzebruch’s cobordism proofs of
his signature and Riemann-Roch theorems, was not written up by them but rather was published in
Palais [Pa] as a series of pieces by many contributors in a volume which remains a valuable reference.
The second proof (§4.5), modeled more on Grothendieck, appeared in 1968 in the ﬁrst [AS2] of a
series of papers by Atiyah and Singer. Subsequent papers treat variations and generalizations.
We begin in §4.1 with the Dirac operator in Riemannian geometry. It is the analogue of Dirac’s
operator in Lorentz geometry, and it is central in many contexts in geometry and physics as well
as in general index theory. In a diﬀerent direction, pseudodiﬀerential operators play an important
role in both proofs of the index theorem; we give a brief introduction in §4.3. In §4.4 we list a few
early applications of the index theorem.
4.1. The Dirac operator
In 1928, Dirac [D] introduced his equation as part of his relativistic theory of electrons. Dirac
worked on Minkowski spacetime. The analogue of Dirac’s line of inquiry for Euclidean space En
with standard coordinates x1, . . . , xn asks for a ﬁrst-order diﬀerential operator
(4.1)
D “ γ1 B
Bx1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` γn B
Bxn
whose square is the Laplace operator
(4.2)
∆“ ´
#ˆ B
Bx1
˙2
` ¨ ¨ ¨ `
ˆ B
Bxn
˙2+
.
(In Minkowski spacetime the elliptic Laplace operator (4.2) is replaced by the hyperbolic wave
operator.) Assume that γ1, . . . , γn are constant functions on En. Then the diﬀerential equation
(4.3)
D2 “ ∆
is equivalent to the system of algebraic equations
(4.4)
γiγj ` γjγi “ ´2δij “
#
´2,
i “ j;
0,
i ‰ j,
1 ď i, j ď n.

PAGE 15
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
15
There are no scalar solutions if n ě 2, but there are matrix solutions. Let10 Cliﬀ´n, the Cliﬀord
algebra [Cl, Ca, BW, Ch, ABS], be the unital algebra over R generated by γ1, . . . , γn subject to
the relations (4.4). A matrix solution to (4.4) deﬁnes a Cliﬀ´n-module. The spin group Spinn is a
double cover of the special orthogonal group SOn, and Spinn is a subgroup of the units in Cliﬀ´n,
much as SOn is a subgroup of the units in the algebra of n ˆ n real matrices. Cliﬀord modules
restrict to special representations of Spinn called spin or spinor representations.
Why does the spin group enter the quest to identify the integer ˆApXqrXs? One key is the for-
mula (2.24) for the ˆA-genus. Assuming n is even, the group Spinn has two distinguished inequivalent
irreducible complex representations S0, S1, and the diﬀerence of the characters of S0 and S1 is an
upside down variant of the ˆA-genus (2.24), namely
(4.5)
n{2
ź
i“1
sinh yi{2
1{2
,
where now y1, . . . , yn are a basis of characters of a maximal torus of Spinn.
Second, the spin
condition was known to be related to the integrality of the ˆA-genus, as explained in §2.4. Perhaps
these considerations led Atiyah and Singer to construct the Dirac operator on a Riemannian spin
manifold. Observe too that on a Riemannian manifold the square of the ﬁrst-order diﬀerential
operator d ` d˚ is the Hodge-Laplace operator (3.4), so in that sense d ` d˚ is already a Dirac
operator. On a K¨ahler manifold, the same holds for B ` B
˚.
The Dirac operator on an even dimensional Riemannian spin manifold Xn is a main character
in the index theorem, so we give the deﬁnition here.
Let SOpXq Ñ X be the principal SOn-
bundle whose ﬁber at x P X consists of oriented isometries Rn Ñ TxX. The spin structure is a
double cover SpinpXq Ñ SOpXq together with a compatible principal Spinn-bundle structure on
the composition SpinpXq Ñ SOpXq Ñ X. Use the complex spin representations S0, S1 to construct
associated complex vector bundles S0
X, S1
X Ñ X; sections of these vector bundles are called spinors
or spinor ﬁelds. The Levi-Civita connection on X induces a covariant derivative ∇on each spinor
bundle. The Dirac operator is
(4.6)
DX “ c ˝ ∇: C8pX, S0
Xq ÝÑ C8pX, S1
Xq,
where c is Cliﬀord multiplication, induced from a Spinn-equivariant linear map RnbS0 Ñ S1. There
is also a Cliﬀord multiplication Rn b S1 Ñ S0, and both together give S0 ‘ S1 the structure of a
Cliﬀn-module. This construction is not quite canonical, since the irreducible representations S0, S1
are only determined uniquely up to tensoring by a line. In §5.4 we introduce the Cliﬀord linear
Dirac operator, which is canonical.
The de Rham (3.1) and Dolbeault (3.8) operators have similar descriptions, and so (3.5) and
(3.9) motivate a conjectural index formula for the Dirac operator. Let H˘pXq be the complex
vector spaces of harmonic spinors, i.e., solutions ψ to Dψ “ 0. The conjectured index formula is
(4.7)
dim H`pXq ´ dim H´pXq “ ˆApXqrXs.
10To deﬁne the closely related Cliﬀord algebra Cliﬀ`n, change the ´ sign in relation (4.4) to a ` sign. Both
Cliﬀord algebras appear in §5.4.

PAGE 16
16
D. S. FREED
For an investigation into various aspects of harmonic spinors, see the DPhil thesis [Hi] of Atiyah’s
student Nigel Hitchin.
4.2. First proof: cobordism
Let X be a closed oriented manifold; E0, E1 Ñ X complex vector bundles; and P : C8pX, E0q Ñ
C8pX, E1q an elliptic diﬀerential operator. The analytic index of P is the Fredholm index deﬁned
in (3.12). The topological index—in cohomological form—is the following. Ellipticity implies that
the symbol σpPq in (3.11) restricted to the nonzero vectors T ˚Xz0 is an isomorphism. Therefore,
σpPq deﬁnes a relative K-theory class in K0pT ˚X, T ˚Xz0q. The Chern character maps K-theory
to rational cohomology, and then the inverse of the Thom isomorphism
(4.8)
φ: H‚pX; Qq
–
ÝÝÑ H‚`dim XpT ˚X, T ˚Xz0; Qq
brings us to the cohomology of the base X. The topological index is the cup product of the Todd
class of the complexiﬁed tangent bundle with the image of σpPq under the Chern character and
Thom isomorphism. The index theorem asserts that the analytic and topological indices are equal.
Theorem 4.9 (Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem [AS1]). The index of P is
(4.10)
ind P “
`
ToddpTX b Cq ⌣φ´1 ch σpPq
˘
rXs.
In the remainder of this section we sketch the main ideas which enter the proof of Theorem 4.9.
Remark 4.11. The K-theoretic formula for the index (§4.5) is more natural and lends itself to many
generalizations. This ﬁts with Atiyah’s philosophy that K-theory, based on linear algebra, is more
elementary than cohomology. Certainly it is the form of algebraic topology which most closely
matches linear diﬀerential operators.
Now to the proof. At the end of §3.2 we indicated that the analytic index depends only on the
homotopy class of the symbol σpPq. Atiyah-Singer introduce the abelian group
(4.12)
EllpXq “ K0pT ˚X, T ˚Xz0q
of elliptic symbol classes. It is a module over the ring K0pXq, by tensor product, and the cyclic
module K0pXqσ0 generated by the symbol class of the signature operator is a subgroup of ﬁnite
index. This reduces the problem on a ﬁxed manifold X to the signature operator twisted by a vector
bundle W Ñ X. However, to carry through this argument one needs that every element of EllpXq is
the symbol of an elliptic operator, and furthermore if the symbols of elliptic operators P0, P1 deﬁne
the same element of EllpXq, then there is a homotopy P0 „ P1. Diﬀerential operators are too rigid
for these properties to hold, and a critical move in the proof is the introduction of pseudodiﬀerential
operators, which we discuss brieﬂy in the next section.
Remark 4.13. If X is a spin manifold, then EllpXq is the cyclic K0pXq-module generated by the
symbol of the Dirac operator. This fact is an expression of Bott periodicity, as realized in K-theory.

PAGE 17
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
17
Bordism enters the proof at this stage. For the signature operator twisted by a vector bundle
W Ñ X, both sides of (4.10) are viewed as functions of a pair pX, Wq, where we only use the
equivalence class rWs P K0pXq. A crucial step is the proof that each side is a bordism invariant
of pX, Wq. This is straightforward for the cohomological formula on the right hand side. For the
analytic index, suppose pX, Wq is the boundary of a pair pY, Uq, where Y is a compact oriented
manifold and U Ñ Y a complex vector bundle. Atiyah-Singer introduce an elliptic diﬀerential
operator DU on Y whose boundary operator on X is the twisted signature operator. They specify
a local elliptic boundary condition, and prove (i) indY DU “ indX DW and (ii) indY DU “ 0. With
bordism invariance in hand, it remains to compute a basis for the rational vector space of bordism
classes of pairs pX, Wq and verify (4.10) for those.
The journey from this rough sketch to a complete proof is replete with interesting detours in
analysis, geometry, and topology.
4.3. Pseudodiﬀerential operators
Let P be a diﬀerential operator of order m on Rn, as in (3.10). Its action on a smooth function u
of compact support is conveniently written in terms of the Fourier transform ˆu:
(4.14)
Pupxq “ p2πq´n
ż
Rn˚ ppx, ξq ˆupξq eixx,ξy dξ,
x P Rn,
where for each x P Rn the function ppx, ξq is a polynomial of degree m in ξ P Rn˚. A generalization,
going back to Mikhlin [Mik] and Calder´on-Zygmund [CZ], allows more general (total) symbols p,
with uniform bounds on the behavior of p and its derivatives as |ξ| Ñ 8. One motivation comes
from elliptic operators: a parametrix—an approximate inverse—is a linear operator of this form.
Also, these operators have a Schwartz kernel which is smooth away from the diagonal, and this
leads to good properties. (The Schwartz kernel of a diﬀerential operator is zero oﬀthe diagonal.)
The theory of pseudodiﬀerential operators, and their globalization to smooth manifolds, is treated
in papers of Seeley [Se2, Se3], H¨ormander [Ho2, Ho3], Kohn-Nirenberg [KN], and Palais-Seeley [PS]
among others. This is only a very small sample of the extensive literature.
If P is a diﬀerential operator of order m, so ppx, ξq is a degree m polynomial in ξ for each x,
then the principal or top order symbol of P is the homogeneous polynomial of degree m given as
(4.15)
σpPqpx, ξq “ lim
λÑ8
ppx, λξq
λm
.
Restrict to pseudodiﬀerential operators with symbol p for which the limit (4.15) exists. Then the
principal symbol is deﬁned, in global form (3.11) on a smooth manifold, and ellipticity is as before
invertibility of the principal symbol. The surjectivity and continuity of the principal symbol map
on elliptic pseudodiﬀerential operators are crucial ingredients in the proof of the index theorem.
We remark that in the Atiyah-Bott [AB1] and Atiyah-Singer [AS2, AS4] papers on index theory,
the global theory of pseudodiﬀerential operators is expanded further.

PAGE 18
18
D. S. FREED
4.4. A few applications
One immediate consequence of the Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem 4.9 is the index formula for the
Dirac operator (4.7). This provides an analytic interpretation of the ˆA-genus of a spin manifold,
hence an answer to (2.26).
Several additional consequences are described in [AS1].
As already mentioned, Hirzebruch’s
Signature Theorem 2.11 is a special case. So is the Hirzebruch-Riemann-Roch Theorem 2.7, but
the more ﬂexible techniques of Atiyah-Singer prove it for arbitrary closed complex manifolds, a
powerful generalization from projective algebraic manifolds. Finally, for systems of elliptic operators
on X—for E0, E1 Ñ X trivial vector bundles—the index vanishes given appropriate inequalities
between dim X and rank E0 “ rank E1, a result which connects Theorem 4.9 to the PDE literature
of the period. In particular, the index vanishes for an elliptic operator acting on a single function.
As new index theorems proliferate, so too do applications, as we will see in §5.
4.5. Second proof: K-theory
Recall the pushforward (2.13) which occurs in Grothendieck’s version of the Riemann-Roch
theorem. Let X be a compact projective variety. For the special case of the unique map f : X Ñ pt,
the pushforward f! : KpXq Ñ Kpptq – Z computes the Euler characteristic (2.3) of a holomorphic
vector bundle V Ñ X. According to the Dolbeault Theorem, the sheaf cohomology groups are
isomorphic to the cohomology groups of the B-complex (3.8). For smooth manifolds and smooth
maps, Atiyah-Hirzebruch found a topological pushforward in one of their ﬁrst works on K-theory,
and it is designed to match Grothendieck’s f! in this situation. (See the text surrounding (2.27).)
There is also an analytic interpretation. Namely, on a K¨ahler manifold X the Dolbeault cohomology
group H0,q
B pX, V q is isomorphic to the kernel of the elliptic operator B ` B
˚ on p0, qq-forms, hence
the Euler characteristic (2.3) is the index of
(4.16)
B ` B
˚ : Ω0,evenpX, V q ÝÑ Ω0,oddpX, V q.
That index is an analytic pushforward of V Ñ X under the map f. The Riemann-Roch-de Rham-
Hodge-Dolbeault-Hirzebruch theorems imply the equality of analytic and topological pushforwards.
The K-theory form of the Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem is a generalization for arbitrary elliptic
(pseudo)diﬀerential operators. Recall from §4.2 that the “homotopy class” of the symbol σpPq of an
elliptic diﬀerential operator P on a smooth manifold X is an element rσpPqs P K0pT ˚X, T ˚Xz0q.
Atiyah-Singer deﬁne two homomorphisms
(4.17)
ind: K0pT ˚X, T ˚Xz0q ÝÑ Z.
The analytic index a-ind takes a symbol class σ to the index ind P of any elliptic pseudodiﬀerential
operator P with rσpPqs “ σ. The topological index t-ind is similar to the topological pushforward.
It is based on the Thom isomorphism in K-theory, which in turn rests on Bott periodicity.
Theorem 4.18 (Atiyah-Singer 1967). a-ind = t-ind.

PAGE 19
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
19
This is equivalent to the cohomological Theorem 4.9, but as we will see in §5 the naturalness of the
K-theory formulation and proof lend themselves to many generalizations.
Theorem 4.18 is the subject of [AS2]. There is a concise summary of the proof idea in §1 of that
paper, though the actual proof follows a slightly diﬀerent arc. In essence, Atiyah-Singer uniquely
characterize “index homomorphisms” (4.17) by a short list of axioms, which they verify a-ind and
t-ind satisfy. Beyond normalization axioms, two main properties of the index feature in the proof.
An excision axiom extends the index to compactly supported symbols on arbitrary (potentially
noncompact) manifolds U, at least if U is embeddable in a compact manifold, by asserting the
independence of the index of the extension by zero of a compactly supported symbol on U to
a symbol on an ambient compact manifold. A multiplicative axiom tells a product formula for
(twisted) product symbols. A robust global theory of pseudodiﬀerential operators is used at this
point in the proof.
5. Variations on the theme
After the initial Atiyah-Singer work, index theory branched out in multiple directions. Atiyah
was at the center of many of these developments, which we can only touch upon in this section.
We begin in §5.1 with Atiyah-Bott’s generalization of the classical Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem to
elliptic complexes. Its manifold applications include a geometric proof of Weyl’s character formula
in the theory of compact Lie groups. The link between the Atiyah-Singer K-theoretic framework
for index theory and the index theory for elliptic operators which preceded it is the extension of the
Atiyah-Singer theorem to compact manifolds with boundary, carried out jointly with Bott as we
recount in §5.2. The basic Atiyah-Singer theorem applies to complex elliptic operators. There is an
important reﬁnement (§5.3) to real elliptic operators which, naturally, links to the real version of K-
theory introduced by Atiyah at this time. There is a canonical real Dirac operator on a Riemannian
spin manifold—perhaps not as oft-used as it deserves to be—so we take the opportunity in §5.4
to expose it. Grothendieck’s dictum to do geometry over a base, not just over a point, leads to
an index theorem for families of elliptic operators. As Grothendieck’s philosophy promises, this
theorem, described in §5.5, appears often in geometry and physics. Finally, in §5.6 we introduce an
index theorem of Atiyah’s which launched an entirely new branch of the subject, though not one
he himself pursued.
5.1. Equivariant index theorems
Recall the classical Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem. Let X be a smooth compact manifold and
f : X Ñ X a diﬀeomorphism with isolated ﬁxed points. The subset Fixpfq Ă X is then ﬁnite, and
our aim might be to compute its cardinality. But the cardinality is not a deformation invariant—
under deformation pairs of ﬁxed points undergo birth and death—hence there is not a topological

PAGE 20
20
D. S. FREED
formula. However, if we count with signs, weighting each x P Fixpfq by11
(5.1)
ǫx “ sign detp1 ´ dfxq P t´1, `1u,
then the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theorem asserts
(5.2)
ÿ
xPFixpfq
ǫX “
dim X
ÿ
q“0
p´1qq Tr
´
f ˚ˇˇ
HqpX;Rq
¯
,
where the right hand side is the alternating sum of traces of f acting on the qth real cohomology.
In 1965, Atiyah and Bott formulated and proved a generalization to elliptic operators and elliptic
complexes. Let X be a closed manifold; E0, E1 Ñ X vector bundles; f : X Ñ X a diﬀeomorphism
with isolated ﬁxed points; f i : Ei Ñ Ei, i “ 0, 1, lifts of f; and P : C8pX, E0q Ñ C8pX, E1q an
elliptic diﬀerential operator which commutes with f i. Deﬁne
(5.3)
νx “
Tr
´
f 0ˇˇ
E0x
¯
´ Tr
´
f 1ˇˇ
E1x
¯
ˇˇdetp1 ´ dfxq
ˇˇ
,
x P Fixpfq.
Theorem 5.4 (Atiyah-Bott [AB1]). We have
(5.5)
ÿ
xPFixpfq
νx “ Tr
´
f 0ˇˇ
ker P
¯
´ Tr
´
f 1ˇˇ
coker P
¯
.
We will not comment on the proof here, which also involves pseudodiﬀerential operators, but instead
tell some applications.
In their proof of the index theorem modeled after Grothendieck (§4.4), Atiyah-Singer [AS2]
incorporate the action of a compact Lie group G on an elliptic operator P on a compact manifold X.
The Atiyah-Bott setup overlaps in case their diﬀeomorphism f of X generates a (compact) torus
of diﬀeomorphisms. In the Atiyah-Singer case, since G commutes with P, it acts on ker P and
coker P, so the formal diﬀerence—the index—is a virtual representation of G. Hence it deﬁnes
a class in the representation ring RpGq.
On the other hand, the symbol σpPq also commutes
with G, and so it deﬁnes a class in equivariant K-theory, an important extension of topological
K-theory which was investigated by Atiyah’s student Graeme Segal in his DPhil thesis [Seg1].
The topological index t-ind, executed in equivariant K-theory, also produces an element of RpGq.
The equivariant extension of Theorem 4.18 identiﬁes these elements of RpGq. Atiyah-Segal [ASeg]
apply the localization theorem in equivariant K-theory [Seg1] to derive a Lefschetz-type formula,
and in particular they recover Theorem 5.4 in case f generates a compact Lie group (torus) of
diﬀeomorphisms.
These various Lefschetz formulæ have many applications; those contemporaneously realized with
the theorems are presented in [AB2] and [AS3]. Here is a small sample. Let X be a connected
11under the assumption that dfx has no nonzero ﬁxed vectors for all x P Fixpfq

PAGE 21
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
21
closed complex manifold with HqpX; OXq “ 0 for q ą 0; then any holomorphic map f : X Ñ X
has a ﬁxed point. In a diﬀerent direction, let G be a compact connected Lie group and T Ă G a
maximal torus. Then Theorem 5.4 applied to the action of a generic element of T on a holomorphic
line bundle L Ñ G{T over the ﬂag manifold leads to the Weyl character formula. On a compact
Riemannian manifold X one deduces strong consequences of the generalized Lefschetz theorems
using the signature operator. For example, Atiyah-Bott-Milnor prove that two h-cobordant lens
spaces are isometric. Some number theoretic aspects of the Lefschetz formula for the signature
operator are described in the Atiyah-Bott and Atiyah-Singer papers. These ideas are elaborated
much further by Hirzebruch-Zagier [HZ], who explore this Lefschetz signature theorem not only for
lens spaces, but also for projective spaces, Brieskorn varieties, and algebraic surfaces. They ﬁnd
deep relations with cotangent sums, the Dedekind eta function, modular forms, and real quadratic
ﬁelds, among other number theoretic objects of interest. This link between Lefschetz-type invariants
and number theory is central to the developments in the 1970s, as we take up in §7.
5.2. Index theorem on manifolds with boundary
As discussed in §3.3, the study of linear elliptic equations traditionally takes place on a do-
main ΩĂ An with smooth boundary, in which case elliptic boundary conditions need be imposed.
(An is the standard real aﬃne n-dimensional space.) For the second-order Laplace operator (4.2)
on Ω, the Dirichlet problem is the system of equations
(5.6)
∆u “ 0
u
ˇˇ
BΩ“ f
for a prescribed function f on BΩ. The second equation in (5.6) is a local boundary condition for ∆:
at each point x P BΩit depends only on upxq. More generally, a local boundary condition may
depend on a ﬁnite set of derivatives of u at x. Lopatinski [Lo] gave a general criterion for a local
boundary condition to be elliptic; see [Ho1, §20.1], for example.
Not all elliptic operators admit local elliptic boundary conditions. Consider the ﬁrst-order B-
operator on functions u: ΩÑ C where ΩĂ C is the unit disk.
The kernel of B consists of
holomorphic functions on Ω, an inﬁnite dimensional vector space, as expected in the absence of
elliptic boundary conditions. For this operator there do not exist local elliptic boundary conditions:
the Cauchy-Riemann equations on a disk are ill-posed. (As we will see in §7.2, there are global
boundary conditions. Also, if we consider the B-operator on sections of a vector bundle—as, for
example, when studying deformations of holomorphic disks in a symplectic manifold with boundary
on a Lagrangian submanifold—then there do exist local boundary conditions.) The topological
nature of the existence question for local elliptic boundary conditions was brought out in work of
Atiyah-Bott [AB3, A2]. Again, K-theory is the natural home for the obstruction. In fact, their
work led to a new proof of the Bott Periodicity Theorem [AB4]. Let X be a compact manifold with
boundary, and suppose σ P K0pT ˚X, T ˚Xz0q is an elliptic symbol class. The obstruction to local
elliptic boundary conditions is the restriction of σ to K0pT ˚X
ˇˇ
BXq, and if the obstruction vanishes
then local elliptic boundary conditions lift σ to an appropriate relative K-theory group. Atiyah-
Bott-Singer prove an index theorem for elliptic operators with local elliptic boundary conditions.

PAGE 22
22
D. S. FREED
The topological index easily extends to the lifted relative elliptic symbol, and the topological index
of that lifted symbol computes the analytic index of the elliptic boundary value problem.
5.3. Real elliptic operators
Consider the operator D “ d{dx acting on real-valued functions on R{2πZ, i.e., on 2π-periodic
functions u: R Ñ R. Integration by parts shows that D is (formally) skew-adjoint. It is an example
of a real Dirac operator. A closely related Dirac operator is D1 “ d{dx acting on twisted functions
on the circle, or equivalently u: R Ñ R which satisfy upx ` 2πq “ ´upxq for all x P R. Observe
ker D – R consists of constant functions, whereas ker D1 “ 0. A skew-adjoint operator has integer
index zero in the sense of (3.12). But for skew-adjoint Fredholm operators P, the mod 2 dimension
dim ker P pmod 2q is a deformation invariant: skew-adjointness implies that nonzero eigenvalues
move in pairs as P deforms, so in particular dim ker P can jump only by even numbers.12 For the
Dirac operators D, D1 on the circle, this mod 2 index distinguishes the two spin structures, which
we have rendered here in a concrete form.
The symbol ppx, ξq of a real elliptic operator P on Rn, as a function of ξ P Rn˚, is essentially the
Fourier transform of a real-valued function; see (4.14). Thus p is a complex-valued function which
satisﬁes the reality condition
(5.7)
ppx, ´ξq “ ppx, ξq.
The global symbol σpPq on a manifold X is a map of complex vector bundles (3.11), and the
reality condition (5.7) globalizes to a complex conjugate isomorphism of the vector bundles which
covers the p´1q-involution on T ˚X and commutes with σpPq. This idea led Atiyah to develop
Real K-theory [A3]; see [Seg4, §8]. Building on this, Atiyah-Singer [AS5] proved an index theorem
for real elliptic operators. This index theorem covers mod 2 indices, such as the invariant on S1
mentioned above, and other cases as well. For example, the natural integer invariant of the real
Dirac operator in dimension four is one-half the integer index, which leads to an analytic proof of
a theorem of Rokhlin [Roh]: the signature of a closed spin 4-manifold is divisible by 16. These real
index theorems are illuminated by Cliﬀord algebras, as explained in §5.4.
Remark 5.8. By design, the K-theory proof (§4.5) is suited to prove generalizations of Theorem 4.18,
such as the real index theorem. For the mod 2 indices I am unaware of other proofs, whereas for
integer indices there are other approaches, such as the heat equation methods we survey in §6.
5.4. Index theorems for Cliﬀord linear operators
Let X be a Riemannian spin manifold of dimension n, and SpinpXq Ñ X the principal Spinn-
bundle which encodes the Riemannian spin structure; see §4.1. Recall the Cliﬀord algebras Cliﬀ˘n
with generators γ1, . . . , γn and relations
(5.9)
γiγj ` γjγi “ ˘2δij “
#
˘2,
i “ j;
0,
i ‰ j,
1 ď i, j ď n.
12The spectrum of a Fredholm operator need not be discrete; still, the assertion about the kernel is valid.

PAGE 23
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
23
Use the “mixing construction” to form the vector bundle
(5.10)
SX “ SpinpXq ˆSpinn Cliﬀ`n ÝÑ X,
where Spinn Ă Cliﬀ`n acts on Cliﬀ`n by left multiplication. The ﬁbers of SX Ñ X are Z{2Z-
graded right Cliﬀ`n-modules, since right and left multiplication commute. Then since Cliﬀ´n is
the (Z{2Z-graded) opposite algebra to Cliﬀ`n, the ﬁbers of SX Ñ X are Z{2Z-graded left Cliﬀ´n-
modules. Furthermore, SX Ñ X inherits a covariant derivative from the Levi-Civita connection.
The Dirac operator (4.6) acts on sections of SX Ñ X, where we use the embedding Rn ãÑ Cliﬀ`n
as the span of γ1, . . . , γn to deﬁne Cliﬀord multiplication. Then DX is a skew-adjoint Fredholm
operator (on suitable Sobolev spaces), it is odd with respect to the grading, and it graded commutes
with the left Cliﬀ´n-action.
Remark 5.11.
(1) This Cliﬀord linear Dirac operator appears in [LM, §II.7], attributed to Atiyah-Singer.
(2) As for any irreducible representation, the spin representations S0, S1 in §4.1 are only deter-
mined up to tensoring with a line, as already remarked there. By contrast, the construction
of SX Ñ X and DX are canonical for Riemannian spin manifolds. We have traded the
irreducible representations S0, S1 for the canonical representation Cliﬀ`n equipped with a
canonical commuting algebra of operators.
(3) One can complexify Cliﬀ`n and so SX Ñ X to construct a canonical complex Dirac oper-
ator, but the real Dirac operator contains more reﬁned information.
(4) If V Ñ X is a real vector bundle with covariant derivative, we can form a twisted Dirac
operator DXpV q on sections of SX b V Ñ X; it too commutes with the left Cliﬀ´n-action.
The kernel and cokernel of DXpV q are ﬁnite dimensional Cliﬀ´n-modules, so by [ABS] their
formal diﬀerence—the index—represents an element of the real K-theory group KO´npptq. This is
the analytic pushforward of V . The spin structure orients the map f : X Ñ pt for real K-theory—
see (2.27) for the analogous situation in complex K-theory—and the topological pushforward is
f!rV s P KO´npptq. The index theorem for Dirac operators asserts the equality of these pushfor-
wards. The KO-groups of a point are computed from Bott periodicity.
Let O8 be the stable
orthogonal group. Then for n ě 1,
(5.12)
KO´npptq – πn´1O8 –
$
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
&
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
%
Z,
n ” 0
pmod 8q;
Z{2Z,
n ” 1
pmod 8q;
Z{2Z,
n ” 2
pmod 8q;
0,
n ” 3
pmod 8q;
Z,
n ” 4
pmod 8q;
0,
n ” 5
pmod 8q;
0,
n ” 6
pmod 8q;
0,
n ” 7
pmod 8q.
(KO0pptq – Z is also correct.) The mod 2 index for n “ 1 discussed in §5.3 is a special case.

PAGE 24
24
D. S. FREED
In [AS6], written in 1969, Atiyah-Singer study spaces FrednpHnq, n P Z, of odd skew-adjoint
Fredholm operators acting on real and complex Z{2Z-graded Hilbert spaces Hn equipped with a
Cliﬀn action; the operators graded commute with Cliﬀn. The Cliﬀord linear Dirac operator is an
example. The main result is that the spaces FrednpHnq form a spectrum in the sense of homotopy
theory, and Atiyah-Singer identify it with the KO- and K-theory spectra in the real and complex
cases, respectively. This generalizes the relationship between K-theory and Fredholm operators
in earlier work of J¨anich [J]. It also gives an alternative construction of the analytic index of the
Cliﬀord linear Dirac operator. Finally, the periodicity of Cliﬀord algebras [ABS] leads to another
proof of Bott periodicity; see also [Kar, Wo].
5.5. Families index theorem
Recall that Grothendieck, in his Riemann Roch Theorem 2.14, considers proper morphisms
f : X Ñ S, not just a single variety X Ñ pt. Similarly, Atiyah-Singer [AS4] generalize Theorem 4.18
to proper ﬁber bundles f : X Ñ S equipped with a family P of elliptic (pseudo)diﬀerential operators
along the ﬁbers.
On suitable function spaces, P is a continuous family of Fredholm operators
parametrized by S, and the analytic index is the homotopy class of this family. Since Fredholm
operators form a classifying space for K-theory [J, A4, AS6], the analytic index lies in K‚pSq. The
topological index construction, executed in the ﬁber bundle f, also leads to an element of K‚pSq.
The index theorem for families is the equality of the analytic and topological indices.
There is also a families version of the Cliﬀord linear story of §5.4, which we illustrate.
Example 5.13. Let f : X Ñ S be a proper ﬁber bundle with ﬁbers of odd dimension n. Suppose
a relative Riemannian spin structure13 is also given. In complex K-theory there is a pushforward
(5.14)
f!: K0pXq ÝÑ K´npSq.
If V Ñ X is a complex vector bundle with covariant derivative, we form the family DX{SpV q of
complex Cliﬀord linear Dirac operators parametrized by S. The analytic index is the homotopy
class of the map S Ñ Fred´n given by the Dirac operators, where Fred´n is the space of Fredholm
operators introduced at the end of §5.4, a classifying space for K´n. The index theorem asserts
that the analytic index equals f!rV s. The “lowest piece” of the index is captured by composing
with a natural map
(5.15)
K´npSq ÝÑ H1pS; Zq,
which may be considered a determinant map. Recalling that a class in H1pS; Zq is determined by
its periods on maps ϕ: S1 Ñ S, in other words by its values on ϕ˚rS1s P H1pSq, since H1pS; Zq is
torsionfree, we compute the image of ind DX{SpV q under (5.15) by base changing via ϕ to a ﬁber
bundle Xϕ Ñ S1 equipped with a vector bundle Vϕ Ñ Xϕ. Then Xϕ is an even dimensional closed
Riemannian spin manifold, and the integer period we seek is the numerical index ind DXϕpVϕq P Z.
13A relative spin structure is a spin structure on the vertical tangent bundle T pX{Sq Ñ X. A relative Riemannian
structure is an inner product on this vector bundle together with a horizontal distribution on the ﬁber bundle f.

PAGE 25
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
25
Remark 5.16.
(1) The family of Cliﬀord linear Dirac operators DX{SpV q gives rise to a family of self-adjoint
Dirac operators on an ungraded Hilbert space, a formulation which appears more frequently;
see [APS3, §3], for example.
(2) A cohomology class in H1pS; Zq is a homotopy class of maps S Ñ R{Z. A geometric invari-
ant of the family DX{SpV q—the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant—promotes this homotopy
class to a speciﬁc map, as we will see in §7.3.
(3) Although we stated these topological constructions for Dirac operators, they generalize in
various ways to families of elliptic pseudodiﬀerential operators.
A situation in which one encounters a family of linear elliptic equations is linearization of solu-
tions to a nonlinear elliptic equation. The abstract setup is a nonlinear Fredholm map F : B Ñ C
between inﬁnite dimensional Hilbert manifolds. Sometimes F is equivariant for the action of an
inﬁnite dimensional Lie group G and is only Fredholm modulo G. One is then interested in the
moduli space, or stack, M “ F ´1pcq{G for some c P C. If F is a nonlinear elliptic operator on
a closed manifold, mapping between functions spaces, then its linearizations dFb at b P F ´1pcq
ﬁt together to a family of linear elliptic operators parametrized by B. The index of this family
computes the (virtual) tangent bundle to M and yields useful information about M. This general
plan is used by Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer [AHS] to investigate the instanton equations on a 4-manifold
(see Donaldson’s paper [Do, §2] in this volume) and it has been used since in many other problems
in geometric analysis.
Remark 5.17. The image of the families index under the Chern character ch: K‚pSq Ñ H‚pS; Qq is
a cruder invariant than the K-theory index, but often it contains information of interest. It can be
computed by a topological analogue of (2.15), and it is accessible via heat equation methods [Bi2],
whereas the more powerful K-theory index is not, as far as we know.
The Atiyah-Hitchin-Singer work is the ﬁrst of many applications of the families index theorem to
quantum ﬁeld theory and string theory, and to mathematical problems arising from that physics.
We take up an additional example in §8.
5.6. Coverings and von Neumann algebras
As should be clear by now, Atiyah used the index theorem as a launching pad for mathematical
adventures in many directions.
One which proved particularly fruitful involves von Neumann
algebras [A5]. Atiyah [A1] comments:
In particular I learnt from Singer, who had a strong background in functional anal-
ysis, about von Neumann algebras of type II with their peculiar real-valued dimen-
sions.
We realized that K-theory and index theory could be generalized in this
direction, but it was not clear at ﬁrst if such a generalization would really be of any
interest. However in one particularly simple case, that of a manifold with an inﬁnite
fundamental group, it became clear that the ideas of von Neumann algebras were
quite natural and led to concrete non-trivial results. This was the content of my
talk [A5] at the meeting in honour of Henri Cartan. Since I was not an expert on

PAGE 26
26
D. S. FREED
von Neumann algebras I attempted in this presentation to give a simple, elemen-
tary and essentially self-contained treatment of the results. Later on in the hands of
Alain Connes, the world expert on the subject, these simple ideas were enormously
extended and developed into a whole theory of linear analysis for foliations.
And in the hands of Connes, Kasparov and many others into index theory and K-theory for C˚-
algebras. An inﬂuential conference talk indeed!
The situation in [A5] is an unramiﬁed Galois covering π: r
X Ñ X with Galois group Γ acting
freely on r
X, and a Γ-invariant elliptic operator rD on r
X. There is an induced elliptic operator D
on X, and we assume X is compact.
For example, X could be a closed Riemann surface and
r
X its universal cover which, if the genus of X is ě 2, is isomorphic to the unit disk Ω. If rD is the
B-operator, then ker rD is the inﬁnite dimensional space of holomorphic functions on Ω. In general,
if Γ is inﬁnite then ker rD and coker rD are inﬁnite dimensional, whereas ker D and coker D are ﬁnite
dimensional, the latter since X is assumed compact. So ind D is well-deﬁned. Atiyah introduces
a Γ invariant measure on r
X and the von Neumann algebra A of bounded linear operators on
L2p r
X, rE0q for rE0 Ñ r
X the vector bundle on whose sections rD is deﬁned. Orthogonal projection
onto ker rD lies in the von Neumann algebra, and its von Neumann trace, a real number, is deﬁned
to be the Γ dimension of ker rD. Repeating for coker rD, Atiyah deﬁnes a real-valued index indΓ rD.
Theorem 5.18 (Atiyah [A5]). indΓ rD “ ind D.
Atiyah’s account of this theorem, as stated earlier, was a catalyst for index theory on noncompact
spaces, singular spaces, and beyond.
6. Heat equation proof
Beginning in the late 1960’s the expanding circle of ideas emanating from the basic Atiyah-Singer
index theorem took a more analytic turn. The focus shifted beyond the kernel of elliptic operators
to include higher eigenvalues. This led ﬁrst to a local version of the index theorem and then to
local geometric invariants (as opposed to global topological invariants). We treat the former in this
section and the latter in the next.
We begin in §6.1 with two basic constructs to collate higher eigenvalues into a single function:
the ζ-function and the trace of the heat operator. (They are analogues of basic objects in analytic
number theory.) The local index theorem, proved ﬁrst in special cases by Vijay Patodi and then
in general by Peter Gilkey, is the subject of §6.2. This work was completed in the early 1970’s.
In the 1980’s several new proofs of the local index theorem led to a deeper understanding of the
origins of the ˆA-genus in the index formula for Dirac operators.
In §6.3 we brieﬂy summarize
these contributions by Ezra Getzler, Edward Witten, Jean-Michel Bismut, Nicole Berline, Michele
Vergne, and of course Michael Atiyah.

PAGE 27
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
27
6.1. Heat operators, zeta functions, and the index
Let ∆be a nonnegative self-adjoint operator on a Hilbert space H. We seek to deﬁne the heat
operator
(6.1)
Ht “ e´t∆,
t P Rą0,
and the ζ-function
(6.2)
ζ∆psq “ Tr ∆´s,
s P C.
Both are well-deﬁned if H is ﬁnite dimensional, and they are related by the Mellin transform
(6.3)
Tr ∆´s “
1
Γpsq
ż 8
0
dt
t ts Tr
`
e´t∆˘
.
If ∆is a nonnegative self-adjoint second-order elliptic operator on a closed manifold X, then the
heat operator Ht in (6.1) is exists by basic elliptic theory. It is a smoothing operator: Ht maps
distributions to smooth functions. For example, if δy is the Dirac δ-distribution at y P X, then14
(6.4)
htpx, yq “
`
e´t∆δy
˘
pxq,
x P X,
is a smooth function of t, x, y called the heat kernel. If ∆is the scalar Laplace operator attached to
a Riemannian metric on X—the Laplace-Beltrami operator—then intuitively htpx, yq is the amount
of heat at x after time t given an initial distribution δy of heat. Heat ﬂows with inﬁnite propagation
speed and instantly diﬀuses: htpx, yq ą 0 for all t, x, y. The properties of physical heat ﬂow inform
intuition about the large and small time behavior of the heat operator of a general nonnegative self-
adjoint second-order diﬀerential operator ∆acting on sections of a vector bundle E Ñ X. As t Ñ 8
the heat operator e´t∆converges (in the uniform topology) to projection onto ker ∆. As t Ñ 0 the
heat operator converges (in the strong operator topology) to the identity operator. A more precise
version of the small t behavior is the subject of an inﬂuential 1948 paper of Minakshisundarum
and Pleijel [MP] in case ∆is the Laplace-Beltrami operator; Seeley [Se4] extends their results to
more general elliptic pseudodiﬀerential operators.
As t Ñ 0 the heat kernel htpx, yq converges
exponentially to zero if x ‰ y, and on the diagonal there is an asymptotic expansion
(6.5)
htpx, xq „ t´n{2
8
ÿ
k“0
Akpxqti
as t Ñ 0,
where Ak are smooth functions on X. For x P X, the value of Akpxq P End Ex depends only on a
ﬁnite jet of the total symbol of the diﬀerential operator ∆at x. If ∆is canonically associated to
a Riemannian metric, then Akpxq depends on a ﬁnite jet of the metric at x; the order of the jet
grows with k.
14Our notation assumes ∆is an operator acting on functions. A small modiﬁcation incorporates vector bundles.

PAGE 28
28
D. S. FREED
For elliptic operators ∆on compact manifolds of the type discussed in the previous paragraph,
the ζ-function (6.2) exists and ζ∆is a holomorphic function of s for Repsq ąą 0. The asymptotic
expansion (6.5) of the heat kernel ht is equivalent, via the Mellin transform (6.3), to a meromorphic
extension of ζ∆to the entire complex s-line, which in fact is what is proved in [MP, Se4].
Now suppose P : C8pX, E0q Ñ C8pX, E1q is a ﬁrst-order elliptic operator on a closed n-
manifold X equipped with complex vector bundles E0, E1 Ñ X.
Assume metrics everywhere
so that the formal adjoint P ˚ : C8pX, E1q Ñ C8pX, E0q is deﬁned; it too is a ﬁrst-order elliptic
operator. Then
(6.6)
ind P “ dim ker P ˚P ´ dim ker PP ˚,
and each of P ˚P, PP ˚ is a nonnegative self-adjoint second-order elliptic diﬀerential operator.
For λ ě 0, let E0
λ Ă C8pX, E0q be the λ-eigenspace of P ˚P and E1
λ Ă C8pX, E1q the λ-eigenspace
of PP ˚. Then for λ ą 0,
(6.7)
P
ˇˇ
E0
λ : E0
λ ÝÑ E1
λ
is an isomorphism. Therefore, for any function χ: Rě0 Ñ Rě0 such that χp0q “ 1 and χpλq Œ 0
suﬃciently rapidly as λ Ñ 8,
(6.8)
ind P “
ÿ
λPspec P ˚P
χpλq ´
ÿ
λPspec P P ˚
χpλq.
For χpλq “ λ´s with Repsq ąą 0, we obtain a formula for the index which appears in Atiyah-
Bott [AB1, §8]:
(6.9)
ind P “ Tr ζP ˚P psq ´ Tr ζP P ˚psq.
In fact (6.9) holds for all s P C, due to the meromorphic continuation of zeta functions. Atiyah-Bott
note that s “ 0 is a particularly good argument in view of explicit integral formulas [Se4] in terms
of the symbol of P. (Another motivation for setting s “ 0: for an operator P : H0 Ñ H1 between
ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces, the value at s “ 0 is dim H0 ´ dim H1.) But while the explicit
formulas are local, they involve high derivatives of the symbol, whereas the characteristic class
formula (4.10) for the index only involves a few derivatives when written in terms of Chern-Weil
polynomials of the curvature. It is this mismatch which remained a mystery for several years.
In place of ζ-functions, the trace of the heat kernel is commonly used in (6.8). This corresponds
to χpλq “ e´tλ, t ą 0. Then for all t ą 0, we have
(6.10)
ind P “ Tr e´tP ˚P ´ Tr e´tP P ˚.
In fact, one can prove the right hand side is constant in t by diﬀerentiation, and evaluation as t Ñ 8
reproduces (6.10). On the other hand, let t Ñ 0 and use the asymptotic expansion (6.5) to obtain
(6.11)
ind P “
ż
X
tr
”
A0
n{2pxq ´ A1
n{2pxq
ı
|dx|,

PAGE 29
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
29
where A0
kpxq, A1
kpxq are the heat coeﬃcients for P ˚P, PP ˚ acting on the vector spaces E0
x, E1
x,
respectively. As is true for the ζ-function, the formulas for Ai
n{2pxq involve many derivatives of the
symbol of P at x, so seem inaccessible as a means of proving the index formula.
6.2. The local index theorem
For the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆on an n-dimensional Riemannian manifold X, the ﬁrst
coeﬃcient A0 in (6.5) is the constant function 1{p4πqn{2. This reﬂects the solution to the classical
heat equation in Euclidean space, and it implies Weyl’s law for the asymptotic growth of the
eigenvalues of ∆, which only depends on n and VolpXq „
ş
X A0pxq |dx|. Weyl’s law, which does
not depend on the heat kernel expansion, was one motivation for Mark Kac [K] to ask in 1966:
To what extent do the eigenvalues of ∆determine the Riemannian manifold X?
Kac focused
on domains in the Euclidean plane E2, though the more general question is implicit. McKean-
Singer [MS] immediately took this up, and they determined the next few coeﬃcients A1, A2 in the
heat kernel expansion, thereby proving a conjecture of Kac-Pleijel. (There are contemporaneous
independent results by de Bruijn, Arnold, and Berger.)
In particular, A1 is a multiple of the
scalar curvature.
For n “ 2, McKean-Singer observe a cancellation which holds at each point
of X, and they conjecture a similar result in all dimensions. Namely, let ∆pqq denote the Laplace
operator on diﬀerential q-forms, hpqq
t
the associated heat kernel, and Apqq
k
the heat coeﬃcients. The
McKean-Singer conjecture is that for all x P X the limit
(6.12)
lim
tÑ0
nÿ
q“0
p´1qq tr hpqq
t px, xq
exists and, furthermore, for n even it equals the Gauss-Bonnet-Chern integrand which integrates
to the Euler number of X. From (6.5) the existence of the limit is equivalent to the cancellation
(6.13)
nÿ
q“0
p´1qq tr Apqq
k pxq “ 0,
k ă n
2,
x P X.
The alternating sum for k “ n{2 equals the limit (6.12). McKean-Singer prove that the limit exists
and vanishes for n odd, and they compute the limit for n “ 2.
In 1970 Patodi [P1] proved the McKean-Singer conjecture via a virtuoso direct computation.
He immediately [P2] applied his methods to prove the Riemann-Roch Theorem 2.7 for K¨ahler
manifolds. A few years later, Gilkey used diﬀerent methods in his PhD thesis [Gi1]—scaling plays
a crucial role—and proved the corresponding theorem for twisted signature operators. By standard
topological arguments this implies the Atiyah-Singer Index Theorem 4.9; see §4.2. Subsequently,
Atiyah-Bott-Patodi [ABP] gave a proof of Gilkey’s Theorem and of the resulting proof of the index
theorem. We recount Gilkey’s main result.
Gilkey investigates diﬀerential forms built canonically from a Riemannian metric. Using modern
terminology to economize, let Mann be the category of smooth n-manifolds and local diﬀeomor-
phisms. Consider the functors (sheaves)
(6.14)
Met: Manop
n ÝÑ Set
Ωq : Manop
n ÝÑ Set

PAGE 30
30
D. S. FREED
where if M is a smooth n-manifold, then MetpMq is the set of Riemannian metrics on M and
ΩqpMq is the set of diﬀerential q-forms. We seek natural transformations
(6.15)
ω: Met ÝÑ Ωq.
Roughly speaking, these are assignments of diﬀerential forms to Riemannian metrics covariant
under coordinate changes. More poetically, they are diﬀerential forms on Met. Even for q “ 0 the
classiﬁcation problem is intractable: any smooth function of the scalar curvature gives a natural
function of the Riemannian metric. Now introduce scaling. We say ω is homogeneous of weight k if
(6.16)
ωpλ2gq “ λkωpgq
for all λ P Rą0.
We say ω is regular if in any local coordinate system x1, . . . , xn it takes the form
(6.17)
ωpgqpxq “
ÿ
I
ﬁnite
ÿ
α
n
ÿ
i,j“1
ωi,j
I,αpxq
B|α|gij
Bxα1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Bxαn dxi1 ^ ¨ ¨ ¨ ^ dxiq,
where I “ pi1, . . . , iqq with 1 ď i1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă iq ď n, and α “ pα1, . . . , αnq with αk P Zě0. The
ωij
I,α are smooth functions. Crucially, only a ﬁnite set of α appears.
Theorem 6.18 (Gilkey [Gi1]). A natural diﬀerential form (6.15) which is regular and homogeneous
of nonnegative weight is a polynomial in the Chern-Weil forms of the Pontrjagin classes.
The nonzero forms have weight zero.
The proof of Gilkey’s Theorem 6.18 in [ABP] uses Weyl’s theorem [W] on invariants of the orthog-
onal group. Atiyah-Bott-Patodi apply Theorem 6.18 to the signature operator P on a Riemannian
manifold X. Resuming the notation of §6.1, the vanishing of positive weight forms implies
(6.19)
tr
“
A0
kpxq ´ A1
kpxq
‰
“ 0,
k ă n
2,
x P X.
This cancellation result implies, as in (6.13), the existence of
(6.20)
lim
tÑ0
“
tr h0
t px, xq ´ tr h1
t px, xq
‰
,
and Theorem 6.18 tells that the limit is a polynomial in Pontrjagin forms. The precise polynomial—
the L-genus (2.10)—is determined as in Hirzebruch’s original proof by computing enough examples.
The road from here to the global index theorem follows established lines.
It is the local index
theorem—the existence and identiﬁcation of the limit (6.20)—which leads to future developments.

PAGE 31
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
31
6.3. Postscript: Whence the ˆA-genus?
Diﬀerent conceptual understandings of the cancellation (6.19) and of the limiting value (6.20)
were achieved in the ﬁrst half of the 1980’s. The setting is (generalized) Dirac operators, where
basic properties of Cliﬀord algebras yield the cancellation. The limit is the Chern-Weil ˆA-form, a
polynomial in the Pontrjagin forms, whose appearance is derived from various sources. In these
works the ˆA-genus appears by direct argument. We give a brief resum´e.
One route to the ˆA-genus passes through Mehler’s formula for the heat kernel of the harmonic
oscillator [GJ, p. 19], which Getzler [Ge2] employs in his proof of the local index theorem. He uses
a homothety which not only scales time and space, but also scales the Cliﬀord algebra variables in
the Dirac operator (4.6). His technique was in part inspired by contemporary physics proofs of the
index theorem [Wi1, Ag, FW, Ge1] using supersymmetric quantum mechanics.
At a conference in honor of Laurent Schwartz, Atiyah [A6] exposed Witten’s idea to derive the
index theorem by applying the Duistermaat-Heckman exactness of stationary phase theorem [DH]
to the free loop space of a compact Riemannian manifold. (During that period Atiyah-Bott [AB5]
placed the Duistermaat-Heckman result in the context of localization in equivariant cohomology.)
In this proof the ˆA-genus enters by regularizing a certain inﬁnite product, as it does in the super-
symmetric quantum mechanics proof [Wi2, §1.2.4].
Inspired by Atiyah’s account, Bismut [Bi1] executed a proof of the index theorem using Wiener
measure on loop space and Malliavin calculus. In this way he deals with integrals over loop space
rigorously. The heat kernel is represented in terms of Wiener measure with the aid of Lichnerowicz’s
formula, which expresses the Dirac Laplacian in terms of the covariant Laplacian. The localization
to point loops as t Ñ 0 is natural in this probabilistic approach. The variable t represents the
total time during which a Brownian path exists, and as the time tends to zero, only constant loops
have a signiﬁcant probability of occurring. The evaluation of the integral over these point loops
is accomplished using a formula of Paul L´evy [L], who considers a Brownian curve in the plane
conditioned to close after time 2π. Then the characteristic function of the area S enclosed by the
random curve (expectation value of eizS, z P C) is πz{ sinh πz. This same calculation appears in
Bismut’s work, only there the curvature of X replaces z, and once again the ˆA-genus is obtained.
The ˆA-genus arises quite diﬀerently in a proof of the index theorem due to Berline and Vergne [BV].
Let G be a Lie group with Lie algebra g. Then a standard formula in the theory of Lie groups
asserts that the diﬀerential of the exponential map exp: g Ñ G at a P g is
(6.21)
d expa “ 1 ´ e´ ad a
ad a
“ Jpad aq,
where the power series which deﬁnes J is the multiplicative inverse of the power series which
deﬁnes the Todd genus (2.5). It was a mystery whether the occurrence of the Todd genus in (6.21)
is related to the index theorem. Berline and Vergne noticed that if X is a Riemannian manifold,
and OpXq the principal bundle of orthonormal frames, then the diﬀerential of the Riemannian
exponential map on OpXq is given by a similar formula. Precisely, there is a natural isomorphism
Tp OpXq – Rn ‘ opnq via the Levi-Civita connection, and the diﬀerential of the exponential map

PAGE 32
32
D. S. FREED
exp: Rn ‘ opnq Ñ OpXq at p P OpXq, evaluated on a P opnq, is
(6.22)
d expa
ˇˇ
Rn“ expp´aq J
`
xΩp{2, ay
˘
.
d expa
ˇˇ
opnq“ Jpad aq;
In this formula the Riemann curvature Ω, which takes values in opnq, is contracted with a using
the Killing form. The result is a 2-form, which can be identiﬁed as an element of opnq. To prove
the index theorem Berline and Vergne work on the frame bundle OpXq, not on the base X. To
compensate for the introduction of extra degrees of freedom in the ﬁber direction, they must study
the behavior of the heat kernel along the ﬁber. It is at this stage, in the small time limit, where
(6.22) appears. Ultimately, that is how the ˆA-genus enters their proof.
7. Geometric invariants of Dirac operators
Up to this point index theory produced global topological invariants of elliptic operators; their
natural home is topological K-theory. Beginning with work of Atiyah-Patodi-Singer announced
in 1973, index theory took a turn towards local diﬀerential geometric invariants.15 Furthermore,
the focus shifted from general elliptic pseudodiﬀerential operators to Dirac operators. Heat equation
methods provide the fundamental tools to construct invariants.
The three papers [APS1, APS2, APS3] of Atiyah-Patodi-Singer introduce the η-invariant of
a Dirac operator.
Its deﬁnition is parallel to that of an L-function in analytic number theory.
Their ﬁrst main theorem, which we recount in §7.3, is an index theorem for a Dirac operator on a
compact Riemannian spin manifold with boundary. A key ingredient in the story are new global
elliptic boundary conditions (§7.2); local elliptic boundary conditions are obstructed in most cases,
as Atiyah-Bott had discovered a decade earlier. The η-invariant solves a problem which served as
one motivation for their work, namely the computation of the signature defect, and this is our point
of departure in §7.1. The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer papers contain many more important theorems,
such as the index theorem for ﬂat bundles, which we do not cover here.
Another view of the η-invariant is the subject of §7.4. Characteristic numbers of vector bundles
over closed oriented manifolds—the integers obtained by pairing products of Chern and Pontrjagin
classes of a vector bundle with the fundamental class of the base manifold—are primary integer-
valued topological invariants. The associated R{Z-valued secondary diﬀerential geometric invariants
had been introduced by Chern and Simons a few years prior. Similarly, integer-valued K-theory
characteristic numbers, which by the index theorem are indices of Dirac operators, are primary
topological invariants.
The associated secondary diﬀerential geometric quantity is the Atiyah-
Patodi-Singer η-invariant. The next geometric invariant of a Dirac operator, or family of Dirac
operators, is the determinant. The underlying theory was developed in the 1980’s, as we recount
in §7.5. It is an important ingredient in the application to physics we take up in §8.
15The natural home for the geometric invariants is diﬀerential K-theory, but that is a more recent development
beyond the scope of this article.

PAGE 33
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
33
7.1. The signature defect
Recall the classical Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
Let X be a closed Riemannian 2-manifold and
K : X Ñ R its Gauss curvature. Then the Euler number of X is the curvature integral
(7.1)
EulerpXq “
ż
X
K
2π dµX,
where dµX is the Riemannian measure.
If now X is compact with boundary, then there is a
boundary contribution from the geodesic curvature κ: BX Ñ R, namely
(7.2)
EulerpXq “
ż
X
K
2π dµX `
ż
BX
κ
2π dµBX.
If a neighborhood of BX in X is isometric to the cylinder r0, ǫq ˆ BX with its product metric for
some ǫ ą 0, then the boundary term vanishes.
Now let X be a closed oriented Riemannian 4-manifold. The Signature Theorem 2.11 implies
(7.3)
SignpXq “
ż
X
ω,
where ω is the Chern-Weil 4-form of the rational characteristic class p1{3. If X is compact with
boundary, and even if we assume the Riemannian metric is a product near the boundary, which we
do, formula (7.3) need not hold. Set Y “ BX. Then the signature defect [A7, §10.3]
(7.4)
αpY q “ SignpXq ´
ż
X
ω
depends only on the closed oriented Riemannian 3-manifold Y , as follows easily from (7.3). Atiyah-
Patodi-Singer [APS1] argue that α is a smooth function of the Riemannian metric, is odd under
orientation-reversal, and is not of the form
ş
Y η for some natural 3-form η in the metric (since the
signature defect is not multiplicative under ﬁnite covers).
A concrete instance of the signature defect studied by Hirzebruch [H4] in the early 1970s was
a prime motivation for Atiyah-Patodi-Singer. Let K “ Qp
?
dq be a real quadratic number ﬁeld—
d P Zą1 is assumed square-free—and let O Ă K be the ring of integers. The two square roots of d
give two embeddings K ãÑ R, thus an embedding
(7.5)
G “ PSL2pOq ãÝÑ PSL2pRq ˆ PSL2pRq.
Let H be the upper half plane. The quotient
(7.6)
X0pKq “
`
H ˆ H
˘ L
G
is a Hilbert modular surface. The group G may act with ﬁnite stabilizers, i.e., X0pKq may be
an orbifold which is not a smooth manifold. It is noncompact; X0pKq has a ﬁnite set of ends in

PAGE 34
34
D. S. FREED
bijection with the ideal class group of K. Truncate each end to construct a compact orbifold with
boundary; each boundary component is a ﬁber bundle with base S1 and ﬁber S1ˆS1. Also, cut out
a neighborhood of each orbifold point to obtain a smooth compact manifold XpKq with boundary;
the additional boundary components are lens spaces.
The signature defect (7.4) at lens space
boundaries was known [A7, §10.3] from the equivariant signature theorem §5.1. Hirzebruch [H4,
p. 222] computed the signature defect at the other boundaries via a desingularization of the cusp
singularity in the cone on the boundary. The formula is a simple expression in terms of a continued
fraction associated to the singularity. On the other hand, Shimizu [Sh] introduced an L-function
associated to the ideal class which corresponds to the end. Hirzebruch [H4, p. 231] proves that the
signature defect at the cusp is the value of that L-function at s “ 1, up to a numerical factor.
There is a generalization of this story to totally real number ﬁelds of arbitrary degree.
For
the general case Hirzebruch conjectured that the signature defect at a cusp singularity is again a
value of the Shimizu L-function. This conjecture was proved independently by Atiyah-Donnelly-
Singer [ADS] and by M¨uller [Mu] in 1982–3.
7.2. Global boundary conditions
To compute the signature defect (7.4) in general, it is natural to consider the signature op-
erator (3.7) on a compact manifold with boundary.
But we must impose an elliptic boundary
condition, and for the signature operator the topological obstruction to local elliptic boundary
conditions (§5.2) is nonzero. Atiyah-Patodi-Singer overcome this obstruction by a novel maneuver:
they introduce global elliptic boundary conditions that exist for any generalized Dirac operator,
including the signature operator.
These global boundary conditions are now ubiquitous in the
theory and applications of Dirac operators on manifolds with boundary.
As a ﬁrst example, consider the B-operator on the closure of the unit disk ΩĂ Cz, as in §5.2.
The kernel consists of holomorphic functions on Ω; a dense subspace is the space of polynomials,
the linear span of tzn : n P Zě0u. This is an inﬁnite dimensional vector space. An elliptic boundary
condition must cut it down to a ﬁnite dimensional subspace. Fix a P RzZě0. Let Ha denote the
subspace of smooth functions u: ΩÑ C such that the Fourier expansion of u
ˇˇ
BΩhas vanishing
Fourier coeﬃcient of eimθ if m ą a, where we write z “ eiθ on BΩ. Then the restriction of B
to Ha has ﬁnite dimensional kernel and cokernel, and it extends to a Fredholm operator on suitable
Sobolev completions.
In other words, restriction to Ha is an elliptic boundary condition. But
because of the Fourier transform in its deﬁnition, it is not local; compare (5.6).
This example generalizes to a Dirac operator DX on a compact Riemannian manifold X with
boundary. Assume the metric is a product near Y “ BX, and so decompose
(7.7)
DX “ σ B
Bt ` DY
near the boundary. Here t is the length coordinate on geodesics normal to Y “ BX, the algebraic
operator σ is Cliﬀord multiplication by dt, and DY is a Dirac operator on Y . Then the operator
AY “ σ´1DY is self-adjoint. Let
(7.8)
à
λPspecpAY q
Eλ

PAGE 35
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
35
be the spectral decomposition of spinors on Y . For each a P Rz specpAY q, the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer
global boundary condition restricts to the subspace of spinors on X whose restriction to Y lies in
the completion of ‘λăaEλ. In fact, Atiyah-Patodi-Singer choose a “ 0, as do we in what follows.
If 0 P specpAY q, then one must take into account ker DY separately, as in (7.10) below.
7.3. The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant
With elliptic boundary conditions in hand, Atiyah-Patodi-Singer proceed to compute ind DX for
a general Dirac operator on a compact manifold with boundary. The problem splits into two pieces:
a cylinder near BX and XzBX. On the cylinder they use the spectral decomposition (7.8) and the
product metric decomposition (7.7) to convert DX to a family of ordinary diﬀerential operators
parametrized by specpAY q. On the complement of BX they use heat kernel methods, as in the local
index theorem (§6.2). Gluing the two regions via a partition of unity, they prove the following.
Theorem 7.9 (Atiyah-Patodi-Singer [APS1]). Let X be a compact Riemannian manifold with
boundary, and assume the Riemannian metric is a product in a neighborhood of BX. Let DX be a
generalized Dirac operator. Then with respect to the global boundary conditions,
(7.10)
ind DX “
ż
X
ω ´ ηBX ` hBX
2
,
where ω is the Chern-Weil form of the ˆA-genus, ηBX is the η-invariant, and hBX “ dim ker DBX.
To deﬁne the η-invariant on Y “ BX, let AY “ σ´1DY and form
(7.11)
ηpsq “
ÿ
λPspecpAY qzt0u
psign λq |λ|´s,
Repsq ąą 0.
This is a Riemannian version of an L-function, an echo of the number-theoretic L-function in the
signature defect on a Hilbert modular surface, and a variation on the Riemannian version (6.2)
of a ζ-function.
The inﬁnite sum in (7.11) converges for Repsq ąą 0, there is a meromorphic
continuation16 to the complex s-line, and s “ 0 is a regular point. Deﬁne ηY “ ηp0q. We remark
that the main theorem in [APS1] applies to more general ﬁrst-order elliptic diﬀerential operators.
The index theorem 7.9 simpliﬁes for the signature operator (3.7). Let X be a compact oriented
Riemannian 4k-manifold with product metric near BX.
The symmetric bilinear form (2.9) is
nondegenerate restricted to the image of H2kpX, BX; Rq in H2kpX; Rq, and SignpXq is its signature.
Corollary 7.12 (Atiyah-Patodi-Singer [APS1]). In this situation,
(7.13)
SignpXq “
ż
X
ω ´ ηBX,
where ω is the Chern-Weil form of the L-genus, and ηBX is the η-invariant of the self-adjoint
operator on ΩevenpBXq given by p´1qk`q`1p˚d ´ d˚q on ΩqpBXq.
16Notably, ηpsq is holomorphic for Repsq ą ´1{2.

PAGE 36
36
D. S. FREED
In particular, ´η is the signature defect (7.4). Note that the signature defect is a spectral invariant
of a natural diﬀerential operator on BX, a property which is not apparent from its deﬁnition.
Remark 7.14. The signature defect also plays a star role in two of Atiyah’s later papers [A8, A9].
The η-invariant is our ﬁrst example of a geometric invariant of a Dirac operator. To illustrate,
recall Example 5.13. Let Y Ñ S be a proper ﬁber bundle of odd relative dimension equipped with
a relative Riemannian spin structure. From this geometric data we obtain a family of self-adjoint
Dirac operators parametrized by S. The lowest piece of the topological index is a homotopy class
of maps S Ñ R{Z. The expression
(7.15)
ξY {S “
ηY {S ` hY {S
2
pmod 1q: S ÝÑ R{Z
from (7.10) reﬁnes the homotopy class to a speciﬁc map, the geometric invariant in question. Also,
Theorem 7.9 implies that the diﬀerential of (7.15) is
(7.16)
dξY {S “
ż
Y {S
ω,
where ω is the diﬀerential form in (7.10). This is a kind of “curvature” formula for the geometric
invariant ξY {S; there is an analogue for other geometric invariants of Dirac operators.
Atiyah-Patodi-Singer [APS3, §7], in collaboration with Lusztig, gave another analytic computa-
tion of the homotopy class of the map S Ñ R{Z. For any loop S1 Ñ S they prove the winding num-
ber of the composite S1 Ñ S Ñ R{Z is the spectral ﬂow of the pullback family of Dirac operators
parametrized by S1. The spectral ﬂow counts with sign the integer jumps in the ξ-invariant (7.15)
as we travel around S1. Alternatively, the union of the spectra of the Dirac operators is a closed
subset C Ă S1 ˆ R; the spectral ﬂow is the intersection number of C with S1 ˆ t0u.
Example 7.17. The simplest nontrivial spectral ﬂow occurs for the family of complex self-adjoint
Dirac operators
(7.18)
Ds “
?
´1 d
dx ` s,
0 ď s ď 1,
acting on R{2πZ with coordinate x.
The operator D1 is isomorphic to D0: conjugate by the
multiplication operator e
?´1x. The union of spectra C Ă S1 ˆ R is a helix.
7.4. Secondary geometric invariants
The most elementary secondary invariant is the total geodesic curvature of a curve in a Riemann-
ian 2-manifold; it appears in the Gauss-Bonnet formula (7.2). The associated primary topological
invariant is the Euler number. The generalizations below are more akin to the mod Z reduction of
the total geodesic curvature, which is—up to a sign—the holonomy of the Levi-Civita connection.
Let G be a Lie group with ﬁnitely many components, π: P Ñ X a principal G-bundle, and
Θ P Ω1pP; gq a connection form. Let p P
`
Symk g˚˘G be an Ad-invariant polynomial on the Lie

PAGE 37
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
37
algebra g. As we have already used, Chern-Weil associate to this data a closed diﬀerential form
ppΩq P Ω2kpXq that depends only on the curvature Ωof Θ.
Furthermore, it is natural in the
connection Θ. Its de Rham cohomology class
“
ppΩq
‰
P H2kpX; Rq is independent of Θ, so is an
invariant of the principal bundle π. If G is compact, which we now assume, then this invariant is
derived from a characteristic class cp P H2kpBG; Rq in the cohomology of the classifying space of G.
In 1972, Chern-Simons [CS] introduced a secondary geometric invariant attached to a reﬁnement
of cp to an integral cohomology class c P H2kpBG; Zq.
(Reﬁnements exist only if the periods
of cp are integers.) In this situation, the primary Z-valued invariant is a characteristic number
of a principal bundle π: P Ñ X over a 2k-dimensional closed oriented manifold. The secondary
R{Z-valued Chern-Simons invariant is deﬁned for π: Q Ñ Y with connection Θ, where Y is a
closed oriented p2k ´1q-dimensional manifold. The secondary R{Z-valued invariant depends on the
connection, whereas the primary Z-valued invariant is topological.
Example 7.19. For N P Zě3 let p1 P H4pBSON; Zq be the universal ﬁrst Pontrjagin class of a
principal SON-bundle. Working intrinsically—that is, with the tangential geometry of manifolds—
the Z-valued primary invariant of a closed oriented 4-manifold X is
(7.20)
p1pWqrWs.
The secondary invariant ΓpY q on a closed oriented Riemannian 3-manifold Y is the Chern-Simons
invariant of its Levi-Civita connection. In this case [CS, §6], ΓpY q is a conformal invariant and an
obstruction to the existence of a conformal immersion Y Ñ E4, where E4 is Euclidean 4-space.
Remark 7.21. The Chern-Simons invariant ﬁnds a natural expression in diﬀerential cohomology
[ChS, F2, HS], which uniﬁes the primary and secondary invariants in a single framework.
The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant is a secondary invariant analogous to the Chern-Simons
invariant, but in index theory rather than the theory of characteristic classes. Let Y be a spin
Riemannian manifold and π: Q Ñ Y a principal G-bundle with connection. Whereas the Chern-
Simons story begins with an integral cohomology class c P H‚pBG; Zq, to deﬁne the η-invariant
we begin with a complex17 linear representation ρ: G Ñ AutpV q; the isomorphism class of ρ is an
element of the equivariant K-theory group K0
Gpptq. From the beginning we see the Chern-Simons
invariant pertains to integer cohomology, while the η-invariant pertains to K-theory. Form the
Dirac operator on Y coupled to the associated vector bundle VQ Ñ Y with its inherited covariant
derivative. Then the R{Z-valued invariant
(7.22)
ξY pV q “ ηY pV q ` hY pV q
2
pmod 1q
depends smoothly on the Riemannian metric and the connection on π.18 The corresponding primary
invariant is the Z-valued index of the twisted Dirac operator on manifolds of dimension dim Y ` 1
equipped with a principal G-bundle.
17There is a reﬁnement to real representations and real KO-theory.
18For the special case of the signature operator, in which the kernel—the harmonic forms—have cohomological
signiﬁcance, the R-valued invariant is smooth. (It appears in (7.13).)

PAGE 38
38
D. S. FREED
Remark 7.23. To obtain a non-topological invariant, we must have dim Y odd. The η-invariant also
leads to new and interesting topological invariants in even dimensions, for example on unoriented
manifolds with a pin structure [Gi2].
Example 7.24. Consider dim Y “ 3 as in Example 7.19, but now assume Y is a closed spin
Riemannian manifold.
The expression (7.22) for the standard Dirac operator (no principal G-
bundle) is the R{Z-valued secondary invariant of the index of the Dirac operator on a closed spin
4-manifold X, which by the index theorem (4.7) is
(7.25)
ind DX “ ´ 1
24 p1pTWqrWs.
The diﬀerence with (7.20) is the rational factor.
The integrality of the ˆA-genus (recall (2.26))
implies (7.25) is an integer. Turning to the secondary invariants ΓpY q and ξY , since they are R{Z-
valued we cannot multiply ΓpY q by a non-integral rational number like ´1{24; instead we clear
denominators and compare ´24ξY with ΓpY q. In the case at hand they agree; a similar comparison
in more general circumstances leads to a spin bordism invariant. In any case, we see that the η-
invariant is a more subtle invariant than the Chern-Simons invariant. Put diﬀerently, the secondary
invariants based on K-theory contain reﬁned information over those based on integer cohomology.
This echoes the stronger topological information derived from integrality of the primary invariants;
see §2.4.
Remark 7.26.
(1) As a concrete illustration of this extra power, Atiyah-Patodi-Singer [APS2, §4] use the η-
invariant of the signature operator to reﬁne the Chern-Simons obstruction to conformal
embeddings Y 3 Ñ E4. Also, they show how to use η-invariants to construct the Adams
e-invariant, an invariant of framed bordism.
(2) The primary indices and secondary η-invariants are uniﬁed in the framework of diﬀerential
K-theory; compare Remark 7.21. See [FL] and the references therein.
(3) The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant appears in many contexts in geometry and beyond. It
also, together with other characters in topological and geometric index theory, makes many
appearances in theoretical physics: quantum ﬁeld theory, string theory, and condensed
matter theory.
7.5. Determinants of Dirac operators
Before proceeding to Dirac operators, consider a second-order Laplace operator ∆on a closed
manifold X, as in §6.1. Then ∆has a discrete spectrum consisting of eigenvalues 0 ď λ1 ď λ2 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ,
repeated with multiplicity. Formally, the determinant of ∆is
(7.27)
det ∆““”
8
ź
m“1
λm.
(Assume λ1 ą 0 or omit the zero eigenvalues to avoid det ∆“ 0.) Of course, this inﬁnite product
diverges. For example, if X “ S1 and ∆is the usual scalar Laplace operator, then up to a constant

PAGE 39
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
39
the inﬁnite product is ś8
m“1 m2 after omitting the zero eigenvalue. One way to impart a value to
this inﬁnite product, pioneered by Ray-Singer [RS] in 1971 and following a technique familiar in
complex analysis [JL], is to use the analytic continuation of the ζ-function (6.2), which is deﬁned
as
(7.28)
ζ∆psq “
8
ÿ
m“1
λ´s,
s P C,
for Repsq ąą 0. Then in the region of absolute convergence of the inﬁnite sum, we diﬀerentiate
(7.29)
´ ζ1
∆psq “
8
ÿ
m“1
λ´s log λ,
and then use the regularity of the analytic continuation of ζ∆at s “ 0 to deﬁne
(7.30)
det ∆:“ e´ζ1
∆p0q.
For the scalar Laplace operator on S1, the elliptic ζ-function deﬁned in (7.28) reduces to the
Riemann ζ-function, up to a constant.
The ﬁrst-order Dirac operator (4.6) is not self-adjoint; its domain and codomain are diﬀerent. A
ﬁnite dimensional model is a linear operator
(7.31)
T : V 0 ÝÑ V 1
between diﬀerent vector spaces V 0, V 1. There is an induced map ŹqT : ŹqV 0 Ñ ŹqV 1 on each
exterior power. If dim V 0 “ dim V 1, then the induced map for q “ dim V i is the determinant
(7.32)
det T : Det V 0 ÝÑ Det V 1,
where Det V i “ Źdim V ipV iq is the determinant line.
If V 0 “ V 1, then the operator det T is
multiplication by the numerical determinant. But in general19 det T is an element of a line, namely
the 1-dimensional vector space
(7.33)
HompDet V 0, Det V 1q
called the determinant line. The determinant construction generalizes to Fredholm operators (7.31),
where now V 0, V 1 are typically inﬁnite dimensional. The formula (7.33) does not make sense if
V 0, V 1 are inﬁnite dimensional; rather, the determinant line is deﬁned using the ﬁnite dimension-
ality of the kernel and cokernel. Quillen [Q] constructs a determinant line bundle π: Det Ñ Fred
19If dim V 0 ‰ dim V 1, deﬁne det T “ 0.

PAGE 40
40
D. S. FREED
over the space of Fredholm operators together with a continuous section det: Fred Ñ Det. It is
the next topological invariant of Fredholm operators after the numerical index (3.13).
Let f : X Ñ S be a proper ﬁber bundle with ﬁbers of even dimension n, and assume f is endowed
with a relative Riemannian spin structure, as in Example 5.13. For a complex vector bundle V Ñ X
with covariant derivative, the index of the resulting family DX{SpV q of complex Cliﬀord linear Dirac
operators is computed by the pushforward
(7.34)
f!: K0pXq ÝÑ K´npSq.
The numerical index is the image of f!rV s under K´npSq Ñ H0pS; Zq. Parallel to (5.15), the next
lowest piece of the topological index is computed by a natural map
(7.35)
Det: K´npSq ÝÑ H2pS; Zq.
The index theorem for families implies that the topological equivalence class of the Fredholm de-
terminant line bundle
(7.36)
Det DX{SpV q ÝÑ S
is Det f!rV s P H2pS; Zq.
There is a geometric reﬁnement of this topological piece of the index. Its analytic expression is
a hermitian connection and compatible covariant derivative on the determinant line bundle (7.36).
The Quillen metric [Q] is constructed using the ζ-function determinant (7.30), and the covariant
derivative uses a similar—but somewhat more subtle—ζ-function [BiF1]. The isomorphism class of
a line bundle with covariant derivative is determined by its holonomy around loops. Base change
along a loop ϕ: S1 Ñ S gives rise to a ﬁber bundle Xϕ Ñ S1 and vector bundle Vϕ Ñ Xϕ. The
bounding spin structure on S1 combines with the relative spin structure on Xϕ{S1 to produce a
spin structure on Xϕ. Choose an arbitrary metric gS1 on S1, and let Xϕpǫq be the manifold Xϕ with
Riemannian metric gS1 { ǫ2 ‘ gXϕ{S1. (The direct sum is with respect to the horizontal distribution
in the relative Riemannian structure.) Then the holonomy around the loop ϕ is [BiF2]
(7.37)
holϕ Det DX{SpV q “ lim
ǫÑ0 e
´2πiξXϕpǫqpV q,
where the exponent is the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer η-invariant (7.22). This holonomy formula was
inspired by Witten’s global anomaly [Wi3]. The curvature of the determinant line bundle is
(7.38)
curv Det DX{SpV q “ 2πi
ż
X{S
ω,
where ω is the Chern-Weil form that represents ˆApX{Sq ⌣chpV q; compare (7.16).
Remark 7.39.

PAGE 41
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
41
(1) The adiabatic limit in (7.37) was introduced in [Wi3]. Other geometric interpretations of
Witten’s global anomaly formula were given in [Che, S2].
(2) The holonomy formula (7.37) may be regarded as a Fubini theorem relating the geometric
invariants η and Det, once one knows that the holonomy of a line bundle L Ñ S1 is the
exponentiated η-invariant of DS1pLq.
(3) As in Remark 7.26(2), the isomorphism class of the determinant line bundle with its metric
and covariant derivative can be computed by a pushforward in diﬀerential K-theory. This
reﬁnes the topological index theorem which computes the topological isomorphism class
of (7.36) as Det f!rV s.
8. Anomalies and index theory
In part inspired by Is Singer’s advocacy of theoretical physics as a fertile ground for geometers,
beginning in the late 1970’s Michael Atiyah turned his attention to geometric problems in quantum
ﬁeld theory and, later, string theory.
Simon Donaldson’s paper [Do] in this volume covers the
burst of activity in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s emanating from the Yang-Mills equations. The
Atiyah-Singer index theorem is a part of that story, but I will restrict my exposition here to Atiyah’s
work in the late 1980’s on anomalies and on his axiomatization of topological ﬁeld theory.
We begin in §8.1 by arguing that anomalies are an expression of the projective (as opposed to
linear) nature of quantum theory. The geometrical and topological link between anomalies and
index theory was initiated in a joint paper of Atiyah-Singer, which we summarize in §8.2. Atiyah’s
axioms for topological ﬁeld theory, and their relationship to bordism in algebraic topology, are the
subjects of §8.3. We conclude in §8.4 by mentioning the modern point of view on anomalies, which
ties together the two aforementioned Atiyah works. The specialization to spinor ﬁelds brings in
topological and geometric index theorems as well, all synthesized in a general anomaly formula
which draws on many of the Atiyah papers we have discussed.
8.1. Projectivity and symmetries in quantum mechanics
Anomalies are often said to be the failure of a classical symmetry to hold in a corresponding
quantum system. More precisely, a quantum symmetry is projective and the anomaly is the ob-
struction to linearization. Quantum theory is inherently projective, and the anomaly—in a more
general sense than a notion tied to symmetry—encodes the projectivity of a quantum system.
A quantum mechanical system is speciﬁed20 by a triple of data pP, p, Hq.
The space P is a
projective space, the projectivization PH of a complex separable Hilbert space H, but H is not
singled out.
One way to deﬁne P is to ﬁx H0 and let CP be the groupoid whose objects are
pairs pH, θq of a Hilbert space and a projective linear isomorphism θ: PH0 Ñ PH. Morphisms
pH, θq Ñ pH1, θ1q are linear isometries H Ñ H1 whose projectivization commutes with θ, θ1; they
form a torsor over the unitary group T Ă Cˆ of unit norm scalars. The basepoint H0 is not part
20There is a more general framework for quantum theory using C˚-algebras, but for this exposition the simpler
context suﬃces.

PAGE 42
42
D. S. FREED
of the structure. Deﬁne P as the limit of PH over all pH, θq P CP. Also, deﬁne the ˚-algebra AP
(of observables) as the limit of End H over pH, θq P CP. (End H is the algebra of bounded linear
operators on H; for simplicity, we omit unbounded operators from this exposition.) The projective
space P is the space of pure states of the quantum system. Embed P ãÑ AP as rank one orthogonal
projections. Then mixed states are convex combinations of pure states. The function
(8.1)
p: P ˆ P ÝÑ
r0, 1s
L1, L2 ÞÝÑ |xψ1, ψ2y|2,
ψi P Li
is used to compute transition probabilities. To deﬁne p, choose pH, θq P CP and identify P with PH;
then Li Ă H is a line and ψi P Li is a unit norm vector. The Hamiltonian H is a self-adjoint element
of AP, usually assumed to have spectrum bounded below.
Fix pH, θq P CP. Let GpHq be the inﬁnite-dimensional Lie group with identity component the
group UpHq of unitary automorphisms of H and oﬀ-identity component the torsor of antiunitary
automorphisms. A basic theorem of Wigner asserts that the sequence of Lie group homomorphisms
(8.2)
1 ÝÑ T ÝÑ GpHq
q
ÝÝÑ AutpPH, pq ÝÑ 1
is a group extension: q is surjective. Let G be a Lie group of symmetries of pP, pq, i.e., a homomor-
phism G Ñ AutpP, pq. By pullback, we obtain a group extension
(8.3)
1 ÝÑ T ÝÑ GH ÝÑ G ÝÑ 1
and a Z{2Z-grading ǫ: G Ñ Z{2Z. The Z{2Z-grading is independent of pH, θq, as is the isomorphism
class of the extension (8.3). The Z{2Z-graded group extension (8.3) can be called the anomaly; it
measures the projectivity of the symmetry.
Remark 8.4.
(1) If pP, p, Hq has a classical limit, and the symmetry persists in the limit, then it is the
Lie group G which acts on the classical system. The passage from G to GH is what was
referenced in the ﬁrst paragraph of this section.
(2) Suppose given a family of quantum systems with parameter manifold S, so in particular a
ﬁber bundle P Ñ S of projective Hilbert spaces. In some physical situations one wants to
“integrate over S” to form a new quantum mechanical system. If we write P Ñ S as the
projectivization of a vector bundle E Ñ S of Hilbert spaces, then the state space of the
integrated system is the space of L2 sections of E Ñ S, assuming a measure on S. The
anomaly is the obstruction to lifting P Ñ S to a vector bundle, a necessary ﬁrst step to
integrate out S. On the other hand, in the absence of integrating out S the anomaly is
not an obstruction but rather a feature of a family of quantum systems, useful in many
contexts.
(3) The isomorphism class of the central extension (8.3) lives in the cohomology group H2pG; Tq.
(The type of cohomology depends on the type of group. Nothing is lost here by assuming
that G is a ﬁnite group.) If we drop a cohomological degree, then H1pG; Tq is the group

PAGE 43
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
43
of 1-dimensional unitary representations. Therefore, the projectivity measured in (8.3) is
obtained via a 2-step procedure starting with linear actions of G on H: (1) replace H by a
1-dimensional vector space, and (2) interpret 1-dimensional representations of G cohomo-
logically and raise the cohomological degree by 1. We will see an analogous procedure in
quantum ﬁeld (§8.4).
Let t0 ă t1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă tn`1 be real numbers, thought of as points on the aﬃne time line, and let
A1, . . . , An P AP. Fix initial and ﬁnal pure states L0, Ln`1 P P. A basic quantity of interest in
quantum mechanics is the probability21
(8.5)
p
`
Ln`1 , e´iptn`1´tnqH{ℏAn ¨ ¨ ¨ e´ipt2´t1qH{ℏA1e´ipt1´t0qH{ℏL0
˘
,
where ℏis Planck’s constant. Physical questions may be phrased in terms of these probabilities.
Fix pH, θq P CP, identify P « PH, and choose unit norm vectors ψ0 P L0 and ψn`1 P Ln`1. The
amplitude, or correlation function, of this data is the complex number
(8.6)
@
ψn`1 , e´iptn`1´tnqH{ℏAn ¨ ¨ ¨ e´ipt2´t1qH{ℏA1e´ipt1´t0qH{ℏψ0
D
H.
More invariantly, the data L0, Ln`1, t0, . . . , tn`1, A1, . . . , An determine a hermitian line L, and the
amplitude is an element of L whose norm is the probability (8.5).
Remark 8.7. The fact that the amplitudes of pP, p, Hq lie in a line L without a distinguished
basis element is another aspect of the projectivity of quantum mechanics.
The lines L form a
line bundle over a parameter space of data. These line bundles are part of the anomaly of the
quantum mechanical system, a counterpart for correlation functions of the projective bundles in
Remark 8.4(2).
The context for anomalies sketched in this section is soft, much as is index theory for general
Fredholm operators. Quantum ﬁeld theory brings in the geometry of Wick-rotated spacetimes,
and in that context anomalies also exhibit more geometry, much as does index theory for Dirac
operators. This is more than an analogy in the case of fermionic ﬁelds, to which we now turn.
8.2. Spinor ﬁelds and anomalies in quantum ﬁeld theory
Geometric links between anomalies for spinor ﬁelds and index theory were forged in a 1984 paper
of Atiyah-Singer [AS7]. (Other contemporaneous papers, such as [AgW, AgG, Lt2] also brought
index polynomials into the theory of anomalies.) The setup is gauge theory in physics. (By that
time Atiyah had already achieved many results in mathematical gauge theory; see the article [Do]
by Donaldson in this volume.) We ﬁrst summarize their work and then relate it to the geometric
picture of anomalies.
Let n be an even positive integer and X a closed Riemannian spin manifold of dimension n.
Suppose P Ñ X is a principal bundle with structure group a compact Lie group G. Let A be the
inﬁnite dimensional aﬃne space of connections on P Ñ X, and let G be the group of gauge trans-
formations: automorphisms of P Ñ X which act as the identity on X. Then G acts on A. Assume
21If the linear operator e´iptn`1´tnqH{ℏAn ¨ ¨ ¨ e´ipt2´t1qH{ℏA1e´ipt1´t0qH{ℏis zero on L0, the probability is zero.

PAGE 44
44
D. S. FREED
X is connected, ﬁx a basepoint p0 P P, and let G0 Ă G be the subgroup of gauge transformations
which ﬁx p0. Then G0 acts freely on A, and in the sequence
(8.8)
A ˆ P
G0
π
ÝÝÑ A
G0
ˆ X
pr1
ÝÝÝÑ A
G0
,
π is a principal G-bundle and pr1 is a product ﬁber bundle with ﬁber X. To a unitary representation
of G we associate a vector bundle to π. This data determines a topological index
(8.9)
ind P K´2npA{G0q – K0pA{G0q.
Atiyah-Singer construct closed diﬀerential forms which represent chpindq P H‚pA{G0; Rq as fol-
lows. Fix a bi-invariant Riemannian metric on G. Then for each connection A P A, the manifold P
has a Riemannian metric which makes the projection P Ñ X a Riemannian submersion in which
the horizontal subspaces of the connection are orthogonal to the ﬁbers. Use the L2 metric on A to
form a warped product metric on A ˆ P. Then G0 ˆ G acts by isometries, and a connection on π
results by taking orthogonals to the G-orbits on the quotient by G0. The associated vector bundle
inherits a covariant derivative, so there is a family of Dirac operators on X parametrized by A{G0,
and the index theorem for families (§5.5) implies that ind in (8.9) equals its analytic index. The
Chern-Weil procedure produces the desired diﬀerential forms from the diﬀerential geometric data.
In particular, ch1pindq P H2pA{G0; Rq is represented by
(8.10)
ż
X
ω
for a p2n`2q-form ω on pA{G0qˆX. Atiyah-Singer transgress ω to a p2n`1q-form on G0ˆX, and it
is this diﬀerential form which appears in the contemporaneous physics literature as the anomaly of
a spinor ﬁeld in quantum ﬁeld theory. They also relate their result to determinants. In particular,
they interpret the cohomology class c1pindq P H2pA{G0; Zq of (8.10) as the isomorphism class of
the determinant line bundle of the family of Dirac operators on X parametrized by A{G0.
The determinant, or more generally pfaﬃan, of a Dirac operator arises directly in Wick-rotated
quantum ﬁeld theories with spinor ﬁelds, as we now sketch in a general context. Let n be a positive
integer, G a compact Lie group, and ρ a representation of G. Suppose
(8.11)
P
π
ÝÝÑ X
f
ÝÝÑ S
is a principal G-bundle π with connection and a proper ﬁber bundle f of relative dimension n, the
latter equipped with a relative Riemannian spin structure. As in §5.5, this data produces a family
of Dirac operators DX{S parametrized by S. The Feynman integral over the spinor ﬁeld ψ is an
inﬁnite dimensional variant of a standard Gaussian integral:
(8.12)
ż
Ss
e´pψ,Dsψq.

PAGE 45
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
45
For each s P S we are meant to integrate over the inﬁnite dimensional vector space Ss of spinor
ﬁelds. The Dirac operator Ds appears in the exponent, which is a skew-symmetric bilinear form
on Ss.22 By analogy with ﬁnite dimensional integrals, (8.12) is deﬁned to be pfaﬀDs, the pfaﬃan
of the Dirac operator. In special cases, such as the Atiyah-Singer setup above, the pfaﬃan reduces
to a determinant, and we make that simpliﬁcation here. Then the result of the integral (8.12) is
the section det DX{S of the determinant line bundle
(8.13)
Det DX{S ÝÑ S,
as in §7.5.
Remark 8.14.
(1) The integral (8.12) is an example of a correlation function in Feynman’s approach to quan-
tum ﬁeld theory. The fact that it is an element of a complex line, rather than a complex
number, is precisely the situation of anomalous amplitudes discussed in §8.1. Here the de-
terminant line bundle (8.13), including its metric and covariant derivative, is the anomaly.
(2) The universal parameter space S, for a ﬁxed manifold X, is the space of Riemannian metrics
and G-connections on X. In a quantum ﬁeld theory one often wants to integrate over the
metric or connections or both. The anomaly is an obstruction to doing so.
The anomaly is the obstruction to a trivialization of (8.13). The topological ﬁrst Chern class of
the index discussed by Atiyah-Singer (cf. [S3]) obstructs a nonzero section, but one needs something
sharper. In [F3] the anomaly is identiﬁed as the obstruction to a ﬂat section, relative to the natural
connection [BiF1]. This leads to an interpretation of the 2-form (8.10) computed by Atiyah-Singer
as the curvature of this natural connection. Physicists call this local obstruction to a ﬂat section
the local anomaly; the holonomy is the global anomaly of Witten [Wi3]. Indeed, the developments
in geometric index theory recounted in §7.5 were directly inspired by this geometry of anomalies.
Remark 8.15. The anomaly as an obstruction to lifting a bundle of projective spaces to a vector
bundle (Remark 8.4(2)) is measured by the next invariant in geometric index theory after the
determinant line bundle—the Dirac gerbe [Lt1, Bu]. We refer the reader to [FS, Seg2, NAg].
8.3. Topological ﬁeld theory and bordism
Atiyah’s engagement with quantum ﬁeld theory went well beyond the index theorem.
One
particularly inﬂuential paper [A11] sets out axioms for topological quantum ﬁeld theories, parallel
to axioms introduced previously by Segal [Seg3] for 2-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theories. One
key impetus was Witten’s quantum Chern-Simons theory [Wi4], which places the Jones invariants
of knots in a manifestly 3-dimensional framework. But there were many other examples too that
Atiyah abstracted into his axioms. His paper [A11] is dedicated to Thom, and indeed bordism
theory is very much at the forefront. Atiyah [A12] writes the following about this paper:
22Physicists begin with a relativistic theory on Minkowski spacetime in Lorentz signature, and then they Wick
rotate to Riemannian manifolds. What emerges naturally is the bilinear form in the exponent.

PAGE 46
46
D. S. FREED
Because mathematicians are frightened by the Feynman integral and are unfamiliar
with all the jargon of physicists there seemed to me to be a need to explain to
mathematicians what a topological quantum ﬁeld theory really was, in user-friendly
terms. I gave a simple axiomatic treatment (something mathematicians love) and
listed the examples that arise from physics. The task of the mathematician is then
to construct, by any method possible, a theory that ﬁts the axioms. I like to think
of this as analogous to the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms of cohomology, where one
can use simplicial, Cech or de Rham methods to construct the theory. This last is
closest to physics but the others have some advantages. In the quantum ﬁeld theory
context, where things are vastly more diﬃcult, the combinatorial approach is so far
the only one that has been made to work (for the Jones polynomials).
Here we give a concise version of the axioms.
As motivation, recall the signature of a closed oriented manifold of dimension 4k for some k P Zě0.
As used crucially in the proof of Theorem 2.11, the signature is a bordism invariant, that is, a
homomorphism of abelian groups
(8.16)
Sign: Ω4kpSOq ÝÑ Z,
where Ω4kpSOq is Thom’s bordism group of closed oriented 4k-manifolds. A topological ﬁeld theory
is a “categoriﬁed bordism invariant”. Fix a nonnegative integer d. (The relation to n in §8.2 is
n “ d`1.) Let Bordxd,d`1y be the following category, ﬁrst introduced by Milnor [Mi2]. The objects
are closed d-manifolds. If Y0, Y1 are two such, then a morphism Y0 Ñ Y1 is represented by a compact
pd ` 1q-manifold X with boundary partitioned as BX “ Y0 > Y1. In other words, X is a bordism
from Y0 to Y1. Diﬀeomorphic bordisms rel boundary represent the same morphism. Composition
glues bordisms and disjoint union of manifolds provides a symmetric monoidal structure.
Remark 8.17.
(1) If we declare objects Y0, Y1 of Bordxd,d`1y to be equivalent if there exists a morphism Y0 Ñ
Y1, then the set of equivalence classes is the bordism group Ωd. In this sense, Bordxd,d`1y
“categoriﬁes” Ωd.
(2) A small variation yields bordism categories with tangential structure, such as an orientation.
We can now state the axioms. Let k be a ﬁeld and let Vectk be the category of k-vector spaces and
linear maps. (In quantum theories, k “ C.) The operation of tensor product deﬁnes a symmetric
monoidal structure on Vectk.
Deﬁnition 8.18 (Atiyah [A11]). A topological ﬁeld theory is a symmetric monoidal functor
(8.19)
F : Bordxd,d`1y ÝÑ Vectk .
This deﬁnition is sometimes referred to as the Atiyah-Segal Axiom System, and with suitable
modiﬁcations and extensions it is believed to apply widely to ﬁeld theories in mathematics and
physics. The viewpoint in these axioms is very diﬀerent from what one sees in physics texts. The
Atiyah-Segal Axiom System has provided a generation of mathematicians with a point of entry to

PAGE 47
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
47
this physics, they are the structure upon which many mathematical developments have been built,
and they have illuminated geometric aspects of quantum ﬁeld theories in physics as well.
To illustrate Deﬁnition 8.18, we show how to extract numerical invariants of a normally framed
knot K Ă M in a closed 3-manifold M from a ﬁeld theory F with d “ 2. Let X be the 3-manifold
obtained from M by removing an open tubular neighborhood of K.
The result is a bordism
X : BX Ñ ∅2 from BX to the empty 2-manifold. A normal framing of K provides an isotopy class
of diﬀeomorphisms BX « S1 ˆ S1. Hence the value of the ﬁeld theory F on X is a linear map
(8.20)
FpXq: V ÝÑ k,
where V “ FpS1 ˆ S1q is the vector space attached to the standard 2-torus. For each vector ξ P V ,
which may be viewed as a “label” attached to K, we obtain a numerical invariant FpXqpξq. The
Jones invariants of knots are of this type. This is one of the key observations in [Wi4].
8.4. Synthesis
We conclude by bringing together the Atiyah-Singer work on anomalies (§8.2), the Atiyah-Segal
Axiom System for quantum ﬁeld theory (§8.3), and the index theorems in §§4, 5, 7.
One starting point is Remark 8.14(2), which tells that an anomaly must be trivialized to construct
a quantum ﬁeld theory by integrating over certain ﬁelds, such as metrics or connections. (Such
integrals are problematic analytically, but the anomaly and trivializations are mathematically well-
deﬁned.) Now if the resulting quantum ﬁeld theory is to be local—and locality is a characteristic
feature of quantum ﬁeld theories, then the trivializations of the anomaly must be coherent in the
background data (8.11). That coherence is precisely what is expressed in the Atiyah-Segal Axiom
System and its extensions. This is one line of reasoning which leads to the realization that an
anomaly itself is a quantum ﬁeld theory,23 albeit of a very special type. For the spinor ﬁeld in §8.2,
the determinant lines in the ﬁbers of (8.13) are 1-dimensional state spaces in an pn`1q-dimensional
ﬁeld theory. This anomaly theory is invertible, but is not necessarily topological. (An invertible
ﬁeld theory (8.19) factors through the subgroupoid Linek Ă Vectk of lines and invertible linear
maps.)
Remark 8.21. We arrive at the same picture by following the ideas of §8.1. Namely, a ﬁeld theory
in the form (8.19) is a linear representation of bordism, but quantum theory is projective and
the anomaly measures the projectivity. Furthermore, Remark 8.4(3) gives a roadmap to locate
this measurement. Here the bordism category plays the role of the group G. First, replace Vectk
by the category of 1-dimensional vector spaces and invertible linear maps.
What results is an
invertible ﬁeld theory. Second, we interpret an invertible ﬁeld theory cohomologically and raise the
cohomological degree by 1. The cohomological interpretation was introduced in [FHT]; see [FH,
§5]. We arrive at the same conclusion: the anomaly, or measurement of projectivity, of a ﬁeld
theory is an invertible pn ` 1q-dimensional ﬁeld theory.24
23This is not quite universally true: The anomaly of an n-dimensional ﬁeld theory may not be a full pn ` 1q-
dimensional theory, but may only be deﬁned on manifolds of dimension ď n.
24More precisely, an n-dimensional ﬁeld theory is a representation of a bordism category B. Following the logic
of this paragraph, the anomaly is deﬁned on the same bordism category B, so it is a “once-categoriﬁed invertible
n-dimensional ﬁeld theory”, as indicated in the previous footnote. Typically, the anomaly extends to a full invertible
pn ` 1q-dimensional ﬁeld theory, but that is not required.

PAGE 48
48
D. S. FREED
This already brings together the aforementioned 1980s work of Atiyah, but we can go much
further. Whereas a general ﬁeld theory is a functor between symmetric monoidal categories, an
invertible ﬁeld theory can be formulated in stable homotopy theory, as a map of spectra. The
domain, rather than a bordism category, is a bordism spectrum of the type25 introduced by Thom.
(We remark that Atiyah [A10] put bordism and cobordism in the context of generalized homology
theories.) For spinor ﬁelds the domain spectrum is MSpin or a close variant. The general formula
for the anomaly of a spinor ﬁeld [FH, Conjecture 9.70]—conjectural as a mathematical assertion
until more foundations are laid—brings in the Atiyah-Bott-Shapiro map MSpin Ñ KO, as well as
all of the aforementioned ingredients. Implicit in it are the various topological and geometric index
invariants and index theorems that we have surveyed in this article.
References
[A1]
M. F. Atiyah, Commentary, Michael Atiyah Collected Works, Index Theory:1, vol. 3, Oxford University
Press, Walton Street, Oxford, 1987, pp. 1–9. 10, 13, 25
[A2]
, The index theorem for manifolds with boundary, Seminar on the Atiyah-Singer index theorem,
With contributions by M. F. Atiyah, A. Borel, E. E. Floyd, R. T. Seeley, W. Shih and R. Solovay. Annals
of Mathematics Studies, No. 57, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965, pp. x+366. Appendix I.
21
[A3]
, K-theory and reality, Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. (2) 17 (1966), 367–386. 22
[A4]
, K-Theory, second ed., Advanced Book Classics, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1989. 24
[A5]
, Elliptic operators, discrete groups and von Neumann algebras, Colloque “Analyse et Topologie”
en l’Honneur de Henri Cartan (Orsay, 1974), 1976, pp. 43–72. Ast´erisque, No. 32–33. 25, 26
[A6]
, Circular symmetry and stationary-phase approximation, Ast´erisque (1985), no. 131, 43–59. Collo-
quium in honor of Laurent Schwartz, Vol. 1 (Palaiseau, 1983). 31
[A7]
, Elliptic operators and compact groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 401, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin-New York, 1974. 33, 34
[A8]
, The logarithm of the Dedekind η-function, Math. Ann. 278 (1987), no. 1-4, 335–380. 36
[A9]
, On framings of 3-manifolds, Topology 29 (1990), no. 1, 1–7. 36
[A10]
, Bordism and cobordism, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 57 (1961), 200–208. 4, 48
[A11]
, Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. (1988), no. 68, 175–186
(1989). 45, 46
[A12]
, A personal history, The Founders of Index Theory, Reminiscences of Atiyah, Bott, Hirzebruch,
and Singer (S. T. Yau, ed.), International Press, 2003, pp. 5–13. 45
[AB1]
M.
F.
Atiyah
and
R.
Bott,
A
Lefschetz
ﬁxed
point
formula
for
elliptic
complexes.
I,
Ann. of Math. (2) 86 (1967), 374–407. 17, 20, 28
[AB2]
,
A
Lefschetz
ﬁxed
point
formula
for
elliptic
complexes.
II.
Applications,
Ann. of Math. (2) 88 (1968), 451–491. 20
[AB3]
, The index problem for manifolds with boundary, Diﬀerential Analysis, Bombay Colloq., 1964,
Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1964, pp. 175–186. 21
[AB4]
, On the periodicity theorem for complex vector bundles, Acta Math. 112 (1964), 229–247. 21
[AB5]
, The moment map and equivariant cohomology, Topology 23 (1984), no. 1, 1–28. 31
[ABP]
M. Atiyah, R. Bott, and V. K. Patodi, On the heat equation and the index theorem, Invent. Math. 19
(1973), 279–330. 29, 30
[ABS]
M. F. Atiyah, R. Bott, and A. Shapiro, Cliﬀord modules, Topology 3 (1964), no. suppl. 1, 3–38. 9, 15, 23,
24
25This statement is for unitary theories.

PAGE 49
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
49
[ADS]
M. F. Atiyah, H. Donnelly, and I. M. Singer, Eta invariants, signature defects of cusps, and values of
L-functions, Ann. of Math. (2) 118 (1983), no. 1, 131–177. 34
[Ag]
L.
Alvarez-Gaume,
Supersymmetry
and
the
Atiyah-Singer
index
theorem,
Commun. Math. Phys. 90 (1983), 161. 31
[AgG]
L. Alvarez-Gaum´e and P. Ginsparg, The structure of gauge and gravitational anomalies, Annals of Physics
161 (1985), no. 2, 423–490. 43
[AgW]
L. Alvarez-Gaum´e and E. Witten, Gravitational anomalies, Nucl. Phys. B234 (1983), 269. 43
[Agr]
M. S. Agranoviˇc, Elliptic singular integro-diﬀerential operators, Russian Math. Surveys 20 (1965), no. 5
(125), 3–120. 13
[AH1]
M. F. Atiyah and F. Hirzebruch, Vector bundles and homogeneous spaces, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 3
(1961), 7–38. 9
[AH2]
, Riemann-Roch theorems for diﬀerentiable manifolds, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 65 (1959), 276–281.
9
[AHS]
M. F. Atiyah, N. J. Hitchin, and I. M. Singer, Self-duality in four-dimensional Riemannian geometry,
Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A 362 (1978), no. 1711, 425–461. 25
[AM]
F. Arici and B. Mesland, Toeplitz extensions in noncommutative topology and mathematical physics,
arXiv:1911.05823. 13
[APS1]
M. F. Atiyah, V. K. Patodi, and I. M. Singer, Spectral asymmetry and Riemannian geometry. I, Math.
Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 77 (1975), 43–69. 32, 33, 35
[APS2]
, Spectral asymmetry and Riemannian geometry. II, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 78 (1975),
no. 3, 405–432. 32, 38
[APS3]
, Spectral asymmetry and Riemannian geometry. III, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 79 (1976),
no. 1, 71–99. 25, 32, 36
[AS1]
M. F. Atiyah and I. M. Singer, The index of elliptic operators on compact manifolds, Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc. 69 (1963), 422–433. 14, 16, 18
[AS2]
, The index of elliptic operators. I, Ann. of Math. (2) 87 (1968), 484–530. 14, 17, 19, 20
[AS3]
, The index of elliptic operators. III, Ann. of Math. (2) 87 (1968), 546–604. 11, 20
[AS4]
, The index of elliptic operators. IV, Ann. of Math. (2) 93 (1971), 119–138. 17, 24
[AS5]
, The index of elliptic operators. V, Ann. of Math. (2) 93 (1971), 139–149. 22
[AS6]
, Index theory for skew-adjoint Fredholm operators, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. (1969),
no. 37, 5–26. 24
[AS7]
, Dirac operators coupled to vector potentials, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 81
(1984), no. 8, 2597–2600. 43
[ASeg]
M. F. Atiyah and G. B. Segal, The index of elliptic operators. II, Ann. of Math. (2) 87 (1968), 531–545.
20
[B1]
R.
Bott,
The
periodicity
theorem
for
the
classical
groups
and
some
of
its
applications,
Advances in Math. 4 (1970), 353–411 (1970). 9
[B2]
, The stable homotopy of the classical groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 70 (1959), 313–337. 9
[BdM]
L.
Boutet
de
Monvel,
On
the
index
of
Toeplitz
operators
of
several
complex
variables,
Invent. Math. 50 (1978/79), no. 3, 249–272. 13
[BH2]
A. Borel and F. Hirzebruch, Characteristic classes and homogeneous spaces. II, Amer. J. Math. 81 (1959),
315–382. 8
[BH3]
, Characteristic classes and homogeneous spaces. III, Amer. J. Math. 82 (1960), 491–504. 8
[Bi1]
J.-M.
Bismut,
The
Atiyah-Singer
theorems:
a
probabilistic
approach.
I.
The
index
theorem,
J. Funct. Anal. 57 (1984), no. 1, 56–99. 31
[Bi2]
, The Atiyah-Singer index theorem for families of Dirac operators:
two heat equation proofs,
Invent. Math. 83 (1986), no. 1, 91–151. 25
[BiF1]
J.-M. Bismut and D. S. Freed, The analysis of elliptic families. I. Metrics and connections on determinant
bundles, Comm. Math. Phys. 106 (1986), no. 1, 159–176. 40, 45
[BiF2]
, The analysis of elliptic families. II. Dirac operators, eta invariants, and the holonomy theorem,
Comm. Math. Phys. 107 (1986), no. 1, 103–163. 40
[BS]
A. Borel and J.-P. Serre, Le th´eor`eme de Riemann-Roch, Bull. Soc. Math. France 86 (1958), 97–136. 6
[Bu]
U.
Bunke,
Transgression
of
the
index
gerbe,
Manuscripta Math. 109 (2002),
no.
3,
263–287,
arXiv:math/0109052. 45
[BV]
N. Berline and M. Vergne, A computation of the equivariant index of the Dirac operator, Bull. Soc. Math.
France 113 (1985), no. 3, 305–345. 31
[BW]
R. Brauer and H. Weyl, Spinors in n Dimensions, Amer. J. Math. 57 (1935), no. 2, 425–449. 15

PAGE 50
50
D. S. FREED
[Ca]
E. Cartan, Les groupes projectifs qui ne laissent invariante aucune multiplicit´e plane, Bulletin de la Soci´et´e
Math´ematique de France 41 (1913), 53–96. 15
[Ch]
C. C. Chevalley, The algebraic theory of spinors, Columbia University Press, New York, 1954. 15
[Che]
J. Cheeger, η-invariants, the adiabatic approximation and conical singularities. I. The adiabatic approxi-
mation, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 26 (1987), no. 1, 175–221. 41
[ChS]
J. Cheeger and J. Simons, Diﬀerential characters and geometric invariants, Geometry and topology (Col-
lege Park, Md., 1983/84), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1167, Springer, Berlin, 1985, pp. 50–80. 37
[Cl]
W. K. Cliﬀord, On the classiﬁcation of geometric algebras, Mathematical Papers (1882), 397–401. 15
[CS]
S. S. Chern and J. Simons, Characteristic forms and geometric invariants, Ann. of Math. (2) 99 (1974),
48–69. 37
[CZ]
A.-P.
Calder´on
and
A.
Zygmund,
Singular
integral
operators
and
diﬀerential
equations,
Amer. J. Math. 79 (1957), 901–921. 17
[D]
P. A. M. Dirac, The quantum theory of the electron, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A,
Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 117 (1928), no. 778, 610–624. 14
[deR]
G. De Rham, Sur l’analysis situs des vari´et´es `a n dimensions, NUMDAM, [place of publication not iden-
tiﬁed], 1931. 10
[DH]
J. J. Duistermaat and G. J. Heckman, On the variation in the cohomology of the symplectic form of the
reduced phase space, Invent. Math. 69 (1982), no. 2, 259–268. 31
[Do]
S. K. Donaldson, Atiyah’s work on holomorphic vector bundles and gauge theories. this volume. 25, 41, 43
[E]
C. L. Epstein, Lectures on indices and relative indices on contact and CR-manifolds, Woods Hole mathe-
matics, Ser. Knots Everything, vol. 34, World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2004, pp. 27–93. 13
[F1]
Daniel
S.
Freed,
The
Atiyah-Singer
Index
Theorem,
April
2021.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJHKp9kYm90.
CMSA
Math-Science
Literature
Lecture
Series.
3
[F2]
, Classical Chern-Simons theory. II, Houston J. Math. 28 (2002), no. 2, 293–310. Special issue for
S. S. Chern. 37
[F3]
, Determinants, torsion, and strings, Comm. Math. Phys. 107 (1986), no. 3, 483–513. 45
[FH]
Daniel S. Freed and Michael J. Hopkins, Reﬂection positivity and invertible topological phases, Geometry
& Topology 25 (2021), no. 3, 1165–1130, arXiv:1604.06527. 47, 48
[FHT]
Daniel S. Freed, Michael J. Hopkins, and Constantin Teleman, Consistent orientation of moduli spaces,
The many facets of geometry, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2010, pp. 395–419. arXiv:0711.1909. 47
[FL]
Daniel S. Freed and John Lott, An index theorem in diﬀerential K-theory, Geom. Topol. 14 (2010), no. 2,
903–966, arXiv:0907.3508. 38
[FS]
L.D. Faddeev and S. L. Shatashvili, Algebraic and Hamiltonian Methods in the Theory of Nonabelian
Anomalies, Theor. Math. Phys. 60 (1985), 770–778. 45
[FW]
D. Friedan and P. Windey, Supersymmetric derivation of the Atiyah-Singer index and the chiral anomaly,
Nucl. Phys. B235 (1984), 395. 31
[G]
I. M. Gelfand, On elliptic equations, Russian Math. Surveys 15 (1960), no. 3, 113–123. 13
[Ge1]
E. Getzler, Pseudodiﬀerential operators on supermanifolds and the Atiyah-Singer index theorem, Comm.
Math. Phys. 92 (1983), no. 2, 163–178. 31
[Ge2]
, A short proof of the local Atiyah-Singer index theorem, Topology 25 (1986), no. 1, 111–117. 31
[Gi1]
P.
B.
Gilkey,
Curvature
and
the
eigenvalues
of
the
Laplacian
for
elliptic
complexes,
Advances in Math. 10 (1973), 344–382. 29, 30
[Gi2]
, The eta invariant for even-dimensional PINc manifolds, Adv. in Math. 58 (1985), no. 3, 243–284.
38
[GJ]
J. Glimm and A. Jaﬀe, Quantum physics: A Functional Integral Point of View, second ed., Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1987. 31
[GK]
I. C. Gohberg and M. G. Krein, The basic results on the defect numbers, the root numbers and the indices
of linear operators, Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat. Fiz. Oszt. K¨ozl. 23 (1977), no. 3-4, 387–460. Translated from
the Russian by K´aroly Buz´asi. 13
[H1]
F. Hirzebruch, Topological methods in algebraic geometry, Classics in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1995. Translated from the German and Appendix One by R. L. E. Schwarzenberger, With a preface to the
third English edition by the author and Schwarzenberger, Appendix Two by A. Borel, Reprint of the 1978
edition. 4
[H2]
, A Riemann-Roch theorem for diﬀerentiable manifolds, S´eminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 5, Soc. Math.
France, Paris, 1995, pp. Exp. No. 177, 129–149. 9
[H3]
, Some problems on diﬀerentiable and complex manifolds, Ann. of Math. (2) 60 (1954), 213–236. 8
[H4]
, Hilbert modular surfaces, Enseign. Math. (2) 19 (1973), 183–281. 33, 34

PAGE 51
ATIYAH-SINGER INDEX THEOREM
51
[Hi]
N. J. Hitchin, Harmonic spinors, Advances in Math. 14 (1974), 1–55. 16
[Ho1]
L. H¨ormander, Pseudo-diﬀerential operators, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 18 (1965), 501–517. 21
[Ho2]
, Pseudo-diﬀerential operators and hypoelliptic equations, Singular integrals (Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., Vol. X, Chicago, Ill., 1966), 1967, pp. 138–183. 17
[Ho3]
, The analysis of linear partial diﬀerential operators. III, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wis-
senschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences], vol. 274, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
Pseudodiﬀerential operators. 17
[Hod]
W. V. D. Hodge, Harmonic Functionals in a Riemannian Space, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 38 (1935),
72–95. 11
[HS]
M. J. Hopkins and I. M. Singer, Quadratic functions in geometry, topology, and M-theory, J. Diﬀ. Geom.
70 (2005), 329–452, arXiv:math/0211216. 37
[HZ]
F. Hirzebruch and D. Zagier, The Atiyah-Singer theorem and elementary number theory, Publish or Perish,
Inc., Boston, Mass., 1974. Mathematics Lecture Series, No. 3. 21
[J]
K. J¨anich, Vektorraumb¨undel und der Raum der Fredholm-Operatoren, Math. Ann. 161 (1965), 129–142.
24
[JL]
J. Jorgenson and S. Lang, Basic analysis of regularized series and products, Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
vol. 1564, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993. 39
[K]
M. Kac, Can one hear the shape of a drum?, Amer. Math. Monthly 73 (1966), no. 4, part II, 1–23. 29
[Kar]
Max Karoubi, Alg`ebres de Cliﬀord et K-th´eorie, Ann. Sci. ´Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 1 (1968), 161–270. 24
[KN]
J.
J.
Kohn
and
L.
Nirenberg,
An
algebra
of
pseudo-diﬀerential
operators,
Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 18 (1965), 269–305. 17
[L]
P. L´evy, Wiener’s random function, and other Laplacian random functions, Proceedings of the Second
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1950, University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1951, pp. 171–187. 31
[LM]
H. B. Lawson, Jr. and M.-L. Michelsohn, Spin geometry, Princeton Mathematical Series, vol. 38, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1989. 23
[Lo]
Ya. B. Lopatinski˘ı, On a method of reducing boundary problems for a system of diﬀerential equations of
elliptic type to regular integral equations, Ukrain. Mat. ˇZ. 5 (1953), 123–151. 21
[Lt1]
J. Lott, Higher-degree analogs of the determinant line bundle, Comm. Math. Phys. 230 (2002), no. 1, 41–
69, arXiv:math/0106177. 45
[Lt2]
, A proof of the axial anomaly, Comm. Math. Phys. 97 (1985), no. 3, 371–379. 43
[Mi1]
J. W. Milnor, On the cobordism ring Ω˚ and a complex analogue. I, Amer. J. Math. 82 (1960), 505–521. 8
[Mi2]
, Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem, Notes by L. Siebenmann and J. Sondow, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965. 46
[Mik]
S. G. Mikhlin, Singular integral equations, Amer. Math. Soc. Translation 1950 (1950), no. 24, 116. (Uspehi
Matem. Nauk (N.S.), 3 (1948), 29–112). 17
[MP]
S. Minakshisundaram and ˚A Pleijel, Some properties of the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-operator on
Riemannian manifolds, Canad. J. Math. 1 (1949), 242–256. 27, 28
[MS]
H. P. McKean, Jr. and I. M. Singer, Curvature and the eigenvalues of the Laplacian, J. Diﬀerential Geom-
etry 1 (1967), no. 1, 43–69. 29
[Mu]
W. M¨uller, Signature defects of cusps of Hilbert modular varieties and values of L-series at s “ 1, J.
Diﬀerential Geom. 20 (1984), no. 1, 55–119. 34
[N]
F. Noether, ¨Uber eine Klasse singul¨arer Integralgleichungen, Math. Ann. 82 (1920), no. 1-2, 42–63. 13
[NAg]
P. Nelson and L. Alvarez-Gaum´e, Hamiltonian interpretation of anomalies, Comm. Math. Phys. 99 (1985),
no. 1, 103–114. 45
[P1]
V. K. Patodi, Curvature and the fundamental solution of the heat operator, J. Indian Math. Soc. 34 (1970),
no. 3-4, 269–285 (1971). 29
[P2]
, An analytic proof of Riemann-Roch-Hirzebruch theorem for Kaehler manifolds, J. Diﬀerential
Geometry 5 (1971), 251–283. 29
[Pa]
R. S. Palais, Seminar on the Atiyah-Singer index theorem, With contributions by M. F. Atiyah, A. Borel,
E. E. Floyd, R. T. Seeley, W. Shih and R. Solovay. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 57, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965. 14
[PS]
R. S. Palais and R. T. Seeley, Construction of Intk, Seminar on the Atiyah-Singer index theorem, With
contributions by M. F. Atiyah, A. Borel, E. E. Floyd, R. T. Seeley, W. Shih and R. Solovay. Annals of
Mathematics Studies, No. 57, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965, pp. x+366. Chapter XVI.
17

PAGE 52
52
D. S. FREED
[Q]
D. Quillen, Determinants of Cauchy-Riemann operators on Riemann surfaces, Funktsional. Anal. i
Prilozhen. 19 (1985), no. 1, 37–41, 96. English translation: Functional Anal. Appl. 19 (1985), no. 1,
31–34. 39, 40
[Ri]
B. Riemann, Theorie der Abel’schen Functionen, J. Reine Angew. Math. 54 (1857), 115–155. 4
[Ro]
G.
Roch,
Ueber
die
Anzahl
der
willk¨urlichen
Constanten
in
algebraischen
Functionen,
J. Reine Angew. Math. 64 (1865), 372–376. 4
[Roh]
V. A. Rohlin, New results in the theory of four-dimensional manifolds, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.)
84 (1952), 221–224. 22
[RS]
D.
B.
Ray
and
I.
M.
Singer,
R-torsion
and
the
Laplacian
on
Riemannian
manifolds,
Advances in Math. 7 (1971), 145–210. 39
[S1]
I. M. Singer, 2010. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5FoaMcCJnmQ. Interview of Isadore Singer for the
MIT+150 Inﬁnite History Project. 10
[S2]
, The η-invariant and the index, Mathematical aspects of string theory (San Diego, Calif., 1986),
Adv. Ser. Math. Phys., vol. 1, World Sci. Publishing, Singapore, 1987, pp. 239–258. 41
[S3]
, Families of Dirac operators with applications to physics, no. Num´ero Hors S´erie, 1985, pp. 323–340.
The mathematical heritage of ´Elie Cartan (Lyon, 1984). 45
[Se1]
R. T. Seeley, Elliptic singular integral equations, Singular Integrals (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Chicago,
Ill., 1966), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1967, pp. 308–315. 13
[Se2]
, Singular integrals on compact manifolds, Amer. J. Math. 81 (1959), 658–690. 17
[Se3]
, Integro-diﬀerential operators on vector bundles, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 117 (1965), 167–204. 17
[Se4]
, Complex powers of an elliptic operator, Singular Integrals (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Chicago,
Ill., 1966), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1967, pp. 288–307. 27, 28
[Seg1]
G. B. Segal, Equivariant K-theory, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. (1968), no. 34, 129–151. 20
[Seg2]
, Faddeev’s anomaly in Gauss’s law. preprint. 45
[Seg3]
, The deﬁnition of conformal ﬁeld theory, Topology, geometry and quantum ﬁeld theory, London
Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 308, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004, pp. 421–577. 45
[Seg4]
, Michael Atiyah’s work in algebraic topology. this volume. 3, 9, 22
[Sh]
H.
Shimizu,
On
discontinuous
groups
operating
on
the
product
of
the
upper
half
planes,
Ann. of Math. (2) 77 (1963), 33–71. 34
[T1]
R. Thom, Quelques propri´et´es globales des vari´et´es diﬀ´erentiables, Comment. Math. Helv. 28 (1954), 17–86.
6
[T2]
, Espaces ﬁbr´es en sph`eres et carr´es de Steenrod, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. (3) 69 (1952), 109–182.
6
[W]
H. Weyl, The classical groups, Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics, Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, NJ, 1997. Their invariants and representations, Fifteenth printing, Princeton Paperbacks. 30
[Wi1]
E. Witten, Constraints on supersymmetry breaking, Nuclear Phys. B 202 (1982), no. 2, 253–316. 31
[Wi2]
, Index of Dirac operators, Quantum Fields and Strings: a course for mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2
(Princeton, NJ, 1996/1997), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1999, pp. 475–512. 31
[Wi3]
, Global gravitational anomalies, Commun. Math. Phys. 100 (1985), 197. 40, 41, 45
[Wi4]
, Quantum ﬁeld theory and the Jones polynomial, Comm. Math. Phys. 121 (1989), no. 3, 351–399.
45, 47
[Wo]
R. Wood, Banach algebras and Bott periodicity, Topology 4 (1965/66), 371–389. 24
Department of Mathematics, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
Email address: dafr@math.utexas.edu
