PAGE 1
arXiv:hep-th/0105097v2  25 Apr 2002
NSF-ITP-01-37
SLAC-PUB-8807
SU-ITP-01/16
hep-th/0105097
Hierarchies from Fluxes in String Compactiﬁcations
Steven B. Giddings1,2, Shamit Kachru1,3 and Joseph Polchinski1
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4030
2Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
3Department of Physics and SLAC, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305/94309
Abstract
Warped compactiﬁcations with signiﬁcant warping provide one of the few known
mechanisms for naturally generating large hierarchies of physical scales. We demon-
strate that this mechanism is realizable in string theory, and give examples involving
orientifold compactiﬁcations of IIB string theory and F-theory compactiﬁcations on
Calabi-Yau four-folds. In each case, the hierarchy of scales is ﬁxed by a choice of RR
and NS ﬂuxes in the compact manifold. Our solutions involve compactiﬁcations of the
Klebanov-Strassler gravity dual to a conﬁning N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theory,
and the hierarchy reﬂects the small scale of chiral symmetry breaking in the dual gauge
theory.
1

PAGE 2
1
Introduction
The origin of the small ratio Mweak/MPlanck is a great puzzle.
There are several known
mechanisms for producing an exponentially small ratio of scales. One is dimensional trans-
mutation, which Nature employs in many contexts. Another is nonperturbative eﬀects, such
as instantons, which are exponentially small in the inverse coupling. A third possibility has
recently come to the fore. In a warped spacetime — one where the normalization of the
four-dimensional metric varies in the transverse dimensions — a given invariant energy scale
can give rise to many four-dimensional scales, depending on the position-dependent gravi-
tational redshift in the transverse space. This mechanism has in particular played a role in
the Randall-Sundrum (RS) models [1, 2].
Such generation of a hierarchy via redshift has a number of interesting potential conse-
quences. For example, one may reach thresholds to produce Kaluza-Klein modes at low ener-
gies, perhaps in the TeV range, with interesting phenomenological consequences. Moreover,
in such scenarios, scattering at apparently low energies can actually reach the fundamental
Planck scale, due to the relative redshift, raising the prospect of experimental probes of
Planck- or string-scale physics at energies far below the apparent four-dimensional Planck
scale; an example is the possibility of producing black holes at relatively low energy scales [3].
Warped metrics are quite natural in string theory, where D-branes generically provide
sources for the warping. Within the context of string compactiﬁcations, a particularly simple
realization was described by H. Verlinde [4]: simply take N D3-branes to be coincident on
a Calabi-Yau (CY) space. As is familiar from the AdS/CFT duality [5], the spacetime near
the D3-branes is of the form AdS5 × S5. It is well known that AdS5 can be represented as a
Poincar´e-invariant four-dimensional space plus a radial direction, with a varying warp factor
that vanishes at the horizon of its Poincar´e parameterization.
The RS models, and the warped compactiﬁcations of Verlinde, allow a large hierarchy
but do not explain it. There is a moduli space of solutions, and the size of the hierarchy is a
function of the moduli. These moduli correspond, for example, to the separations of various
branes. Goldberger and Wise [6] have shown that additional dynamics can ﬁx the moduli
and produce a calculable large hierarchy. Their analysis was phenomenological; the goal of
our paper is to examine this issue in string theory, in the framework suggested by Verlinde.
In particular, as has been exhibited in the work of [7] (see also [8, 9]), a natural mechanism
to generate such a hierarchy is to consider warped compactiﬁcations with both RR and NS
ﬂuxes present.
One way to understand this arises from a picture where branes are placed at a singularity.
2

PAGE 3
The low energy physics of D3-branes on a CY manifold is conformally invariant and N = 4
supersymmetric. In order to ﬁx the moduli it is necessary to break the conformal invariance
and most of the supersymmetry. Precisely this same issue arises in the context of Maldacena
duality. String theory on AdS5 × S5 is dual to N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory.
To ﬁnd string duals of gauge theories with conﬁnement and chiral symmetry breaking one
must reduce the symmetry; in the supergravity context this generates potentials which can
ﬁx some of the moduli and stabilize a hierarchy.
A simple means of reducing the symmetry is to place the D3-branes not at a smooth point
of the transverse space but at a singularity [10, 11, 12, 13]. Indeed, placing them at a generic
CY singularity, a conifold point [14], reduces the supersymmetry to N = 1. This does not
break the conformal invariance, so it is also necessary to add additional ‘fractional’ branes
localized at the conifold singularity [15, 16, 17]. In the ﬁnal analysis these branes dissolve
into ﬂux, and result in a nonsingular solution that has recently been found by Klebanov and
Strassler (KS) [7]. So while the picture of branes and fractional branes at a conifold is used
to motivate the construction, the net result is that one ends up with a string background
with RR and NS ﬂuxes, which lead to a smooth string solution with a large hierarchy.
The KS solution is, however, noncompact and therefore not suitable as a means of re-
ducing string theory to four dimensions; in particular it would produce an inﬁnite 4d Planck
scale. Thus, our goal is to ﬁnd true string compactiﬁcations, with a ﬁnite 4d Planck scale
and a local region of the KS form which generates a large but ﬁnite hierarchy. This hierar-
chy will be determined by the quantized values of the ﬂuxes on the compact manifold. (For
another discussion of compactiﬁcations with ﬂuxes, see [18].)
The outline of our paper is as follows. In section 2 we consider global constraints on
warped IIB solutions. Such constraints have been used in the past to exclude warped so-
lutions of IIB supergravity, but in the context of string theory their eﬀect is to require the
presence of objects of negative tension such as O3 planes and wrapped D7-branes. Further,
when the localized sources satisfy a certain BPS-like bound, we are able from the global con-
straints to ﬁnd the general solution. We ﬁnd that, in the classical approximation in which
we work, the radial modulus is a ﬂat direction with zero cosmological constant. This is the
case even though supersymmetry is generically broken at a scale that depends on the radial
modulus. Thus, these are no-scale models [19].
In section 3 we focus on the local structure of the compactiﬁcations, beginning with a
review of the Verlinde solution and its generalizations. In particular, in the presence of certain
ﬂuxes on a compact manifold, together with the required O3 planes or D7-branes, we show
that compact smooth string solutions exist with the hierarchy ﬁxed by the ﬂuxes, in a limit of
3

PAGE 4
large ﬂuxes. However, as noted above, the overall radius of the compact dimensions is always
left unﬁxed. This reﬂects the familiar feature of string compactiﬁcations, that it is very
diﬃcult to stabilize all moduli, though we should note that in classical IIB compactiﬁcations
with ﬂuxes the dilaton generically is stabilized.1 In fact the eﬀective theories that we ﬁnd
are very similar to those which arise in heterotic string compactiﬁcations [21, 22].
We
also outline the dual, gauge theory, description of these solutions. Section 4 is devoted to
constructing explicit examples, ﬁrst as orientifolds of CY compactiﬁcations, and then as
F-theory compactiﬁcations (which allow larger ﬂuxes and hierarchies).
2
Warped compactiﬁcations: global constraints
We begin by working in the approximation of low energy IIB supergravity, with such localized
sources as arise in string theory. In pure supergravity, the integrated ﬁeld equations rule
out warped compactiﬁcations under broad conditions [23, 24].
In section 2.1 we revisit
this argument with localized sources included, and show that a warped compactiﬁcation is
possible if sources with negative tension are present; such objects do exist in string theory.
With the constraint thus weakened, it does not appear possible to give a simple descrip-
tion of the general warped solution. In section 2.2 we show that when the localized sources
satisfy a certain BPS-like bound involving their energy-momentum tensor and their D3-brane
charge, then the global constraints do determine the general solution. The localized sources
that we consider — D3-branes, wrapped D7-branes, and O3-planes — all satisfy this bound.
We discuss various special properties of these solutions, in particular the eﬀective action for
their moduli, and we relate them to solutions recently considered in the literature.
2.1
Action, equations of motion, and constraints
Our starting point is the eﬀective action2
SIIB =
1
2κ102
Z
d10x√−gs
(
e−2φ h
Rs + 4(∇φ)2i
−
F 2
(1)
2
−
1
2 · 3!G(3) · G(3) −
˜F 2
(5)
4 · 5!
)
+
1
8iκ102
Z
eφC(4) ∧G(3) ∧G(3) + Sloc .
(2.1)
1More general compactiﬁcations with ﬂuxes will be discussed in ref. [20]. In particular, some of these
have no moduli, and are reliably studied in a regime where low-energy supergravity is valid.
2We use the conventions of [25].
4

PAGE 5
Here gs denotes the string metric. We have also deﬁned the combined three-ﬂux, G(3) =
F(3) −τH(3), where as usual τ = C(0) + ie−φ, and
˜F(5) = F(5) −1
2C(2) ∧H(3) + 1
2B(2) ∧F(3) .
(2.2)
The term Sloc is the action of localized objects, such as branes, which will become important
shortly. The condition ˜F(5) = ∗˜F(5) must as usual be imposed by hand on the equations of
motion.
We will be considering compactiﬁcations arising from F-theory, so it is particularly useful
to reformulate the action in an SL(2, Z) invariant form by deﬁning the Einstein metric
gMN = e−φ/2gs MN, whence the action becomes
SIIB =
1
2κ102
Z
d10x√−g
(
R −∂Mτ∂M ¯τ
2(Im τ)2 −G(3) · G(3)
12 Im τ
−
˜F 2
(5)
4 · 5!
)
+
1
8iκ102
Z C(4) ∧G(3) ∧G(3)
Im τ
+ Sloc .
(2.3)
Henceforth we use the Einstein metric throughout. Invariance under the SL(2, Z) transform
τ →aτ + b
cτ + d ,
(2.4)
together with the transformation
G(3) →
G(3)
cτ + d
(2.5)
is readily checked.
Our interest is in warped metrics maintaining four-dimensional Poincar´e symmetry, with
convenient parameterization
ds2
10 = e2A(y)ηµνdxµdxν + e−2A(y)˜gmndymdyn
(2.6)
in terms of four-dimensional coordinates xµ and coordinates ym on the compact manifold
M6. The axion/dilaton will be allowed to vary over the compact manifold,
τ = τ(y) ,
(2.7)
and since we will consider D7-branes, monodromies of the form (2.4) will be allowed. To
maintain Poincar´e invariance only compact components of G(3) are present, and furthermore,
with monodromies (2.5), these will transform in a non-trivial bundle over M6:
G(3) ∈σ(Ω3 ⊗L) ,
(2.8)
5

PAGE 6
where Ωdenotes the canonical bundle, and L is the line bundle deﬁned by the transformation
law (2.5). Finally, Poincar´e invariance and the Bianchi identity allows a ﬁve-form ﬂux of the
form
˜F(5) = (1 + ∗)[dα ∧dx0 ∧dx1 ∧dx2 ∧dx3] ,
(2.9)
with α a function on the compact space. Also, in accord with Poincar´e invariance, we will
allow some number of D3-branes along the noncompact directions, as well as D7-branes
ﬁlling the noncompact directions and wrapping certain four-cycles in M6.
Einstein’s equation, trace reversed, is
RMN = κ10
2

TMN −1
8gMNT

,
(2.10)
where TMN = T sugra
MN
+ T loc
MN is the total stress tensor of the supergravity ﬁelds and the
localized objects. In particular, the latter contribution is
T loc
MN = −
2
√−g
δSloc
δgMN .
(2.11)
The noncompact components take the form
Rµν = −gµν
 GmnpG
mnp
48 Im τ
+ e−8A
4
∂mα∂mα
!
+ κ10
2

T loc
µν −1
8gµνT loc

.
(2.12)
From the metric Ansatz (2.6), one computes the Ricci components
Rµν = −ηµνe4A ˜∇2A = −1
4ηµν
 ˜∇2e4A −e−4A∂me4A∂˜me4A
.
(2.13)
(A tilde denotes use of the metric ˜gmn.) Using this and tracing (2.12) gives
˜∇2A = e−2A GmnpG
mnp
48 Im τ
+ e−6A
4
∂mα∂mα + κ102
8 e−2A(T m
m −T µ
µ )loc .
(2.14)
or
˜∇2e4A = e2AGmnpG
mnp
12 Im τ
+ e−6Ah
∂mα∂mα + ∂me4A∂me4Ai
+ κ102
2 e2A(T m
m −T µ
µ )loc .
(2.15)
These equations serve as stringent constraints on ﬂux/brane conﬁgurations that can lead
to warped solutions on compact manifolds.3 To see this, note that the integrals of their left
3One reaches the same conclusions by considering ∇2ekA for any positive k, but k = 4 is the value that
will be useful in the next subsection.
6

PAGE 7
sides over a compact manifold M6 vanish, whereas the ﬂux and warp terms on the right-
hand side are positive deﬁnite. Thus, in the absence of localized sources there is a no-go
theorem [23, 24]: the ﬂuxes must vanish and the warp factor must be constant. For a warped
solution the stress terms on the RHS must be negative, which can only be true under certain
circumstances.
For example, consider a p-brane wrapped on a (p −3)-cycle Σ of the manifold M6. To
leading order in α′ (and in the case of vanishing ﬂuxes along the brane) this contributes a
source action
Sloc = −
Z
R4×Σ dp+1ξ Tp
√−g + µp
Z
R4×Σ Cp+1 ;
(2.16)
for positive tension objects the Einstein frame tension is
Tp = |µp|e(p−3)φ/4 .
(2.17)
Eq. (2.16) gives a stress tensor
T loc
µν = −Tpe2Aηµνδ(Σ) ,
T loc
mn = −TpΠΣ
mnδ(Σ) ,
(2.18)
where δ(Σ) and ΠΣ denote the delta function and projector on the cycle Σ, respectively.
From this we ﬁnd
(T m
m −T µ
µ )loc = (7 −p)Tpδ(Σ) .
(2.19)
Eq. (2.19) tells us that for p < 7, in order to have the required negative stress on the RHS
of the constraint (2.15), the compactiﬁcation must involve negative tension objects.
String theory does have such objects, and so evades the no-go theorem of [23, 24]. O3
planes are a simple example. The T 6/Z2 orientifold, which is T-dual to the type I theory, is
a compact Minkowski solution with 16 D3-branes and 64 O3-planes [25]. This implies that
the O3 tension is −1
4T3. This orientifold was discussed in ref. [4] as an example of a warped
string solution.
Note that F-theory compactiﬁcations, despite having D7-branes, dilaton gradients, and
RR 1-form ﬂuxes, satisfy the constraint (2.15) without negative tension. This is because
terms involving τ gradients do not enter the constraint, and the D7 brane stress tensor
contributions vanish by eq. (2.19).
To be precise, this is true only to leading order in α′. It is necessary to include also
the ﬁrst α′ corrections to the D7 action Sloc (we will explain this expansion below). In the
Chern-Simons action the correction is [26]
−µ3
Z
R4×Σ C(4) ∧p1(R)
48
= µ7
96(2πα′)2
Z
R4×Σ C(4) ∧Tr (R(2) ∧R(2)) .
(2.20)
7

PAGE 8
This Chern-Simons coupling captures the induced D3 charge on the wrapped D7-brane. In
the DBI action it is [27]
−µ7
96(2πα′)2
Z
R4×Σ d4x√−gTr(R(2) ∧∗R(2)) .
(2.21)
This term computes the ﬁrst α′ correction to the wrapped D7-brane tension.4 The Chern-
Simons coupling has the eﬀect, for example, that a D7-brane wrapped on K3 has −1 unit of
D3 charge [26]. This state is still BPS, with the same supersymmetry as the D3-brane, so
the DBI coupling must contribute −T3 to the tension. In F-theory, this background charge
is given in terms of the Euler number of the corresponding fourfold by
QD7
3
= −χ(X)
24
,
(2.22)
and N = 1 supersymmetry implies the corresponding tension Qloc
3 T3. This can be thought of
as coming from the summed contribution of all 7-branes wrapping four-cycles in the base of
the elliptic ﬁbration X. To directly derive this tension along the lines discussed above, one
should use the generalization of (2.21) which is applicable to branes wrapping divisors in the
(non-CY) base of X; the result is guaranteed by the supersymmetry of the conﬁguration,
and the direct calculation is beyond the scope of our work.
We have been discussing constraints from the integrated Einstein equation. The Bianchi
identity/equations of motion for the 5-form ﬂux is5
d ˜F(5) = H(3) ∧F(3) + 2κ10
2T3ρloc
3
(2.23)
where ρloc
3
is the D3 charge density form from localized sources; this includes the contributions
of the D7-branes or O3 planes, and also of mobile D3-branes that may be present.6 The
integrated Bianchi identity
1
2κ102T3
Z
M6
H(3) ∧F(3) + Qloc
3
= 0
(2.24)
4For simplicity we are considering in eqs. (2.20, 2.21) the case of a trivial normal bundle; the full form is
given in ref. [28]. The F-theory result (2.22) is general.
5 Recall that 2κ102 = (2π)7α′4, µ3 = (2π)−3α′−2, µ7 = (2π)−7α′−4, and, in Einstein frame, T3 = µ3 [25].
6In deriving this ﬁeld equation there is an annoying subtlety due to the self-dual ﬂux.
The electric
coupling of C(4) must actually be half of what we have written in eqs. (2.16, 2.20), in order to obtain
eq. (2.23). However, any object carrying D3 charge also has a magnetic coupling to C(4); in a self-dual
background the action for a probe is then obtained by doubling the electric coupling as we have done.
An alternative approach to the self-dual ﬂux is to use a Lorentz-noninvariant action: double the F 2
(5) and
Chern-Simons terms in the actions (2.1, 2.3) but restrict to terms in which F(5) or C(4) has a 1-component.
This action, derived by T -duality from the IIA action, is well-suited to the study of compactiﬁcation of the
IIB theory.
8

PAGE 9
states that the total D3 charge from supergravity backgrounds and localized sources vanishes.
In the next subsection, we will analyze the constraints (2.15, 2.24) further.
Finally, let us discuss the nature of the α′ expansion. The localized source in the Bianchi
identity (2.23) is of order Nα′2, where N is the characteristic D3 charge. It is not possible to
take N to be parametrically large, because the negative contributions to the Bianchi identity
are determined by the topology of the manifold. However, the Euler number (2.22) can be
quite large in a given example, and so we will treat N as an eﬀective large parameter as in
ref. [4]. We will then treat Nα′2 as being of order one, but drop order α′ eﬀects such as the
string corrections to the supergravity action. This is why we needed to keep the curvature
terms in the D7-brane action. The Bianchi identity then implies that G(3) = O(N1/2α′); the
factor of α′ is consistent with the quantization
1
2πα′
Z
F(3) ∈2πZ ,
1
2πα′
Z
H(3) ∈2πZ ,
(2.25)
and the number of 3-form ﬂux units then scales as N1/2.
2.2
Special solutions
2.2.1
A BPS-like condition
With general negative tension sources, the constraints from the integrated ﬁeld equations
appear to be rather weak. However, in the special case that
1
4(T m
m −T µ
µ )loc ≥T3ρloc
3
(2.26)
for all localized sources, the global constraints determine the form of the solution completely.
In fact, the inequality (2.26) holds for all of the localized sources considered in this
paper. For D3-branes and O3 planes, whose integrated ρ3 is respectively +1 and −1
4, the
stress tensor is
T 0
0 = T 1
1 = T 2
2 = T 3
3 = −T3ρ3 ,
T m
m = 0 ,
(2.27)
and so the inequality is actually saturated. Anti-D3-branes satisfy the inequality but do
not saturate it. D5-branes wrapped on collapsed cycles also satisfy the inequality, as their
tension comes entirely from their induced D3 charge.
For D7-branes, the nonvanishing contributions to the two sides of the inequality come
from the curvature terms (2.20, 2.21). In the simple case of D7-branes wrapped on K3, the
property ∗R(2) = R(2) implies that the inequality is saturated. If a nontrivial gauge bundle
is introduced, the inequality is still respected as a consequence of FµνF µν ≥Fµν(∗F)µν. For
9

PAGE 10
the more general wrappings that arise in F-theory, we argue below that the inequality is
saturated.
There are objects that do violate the inequality (2.26).
O5 planes make a negative
contribution to the LHS and zero contribution to the RHS. Anti-O3 planes make a negative
contribution to the LHS and a positive contribution to the RHS.
The inequality (2.26) resembles a BPS condition. Indeed, the underlying IIB supersym-
metry algebra implies that
H ≥T3Q3 .
(2.28)
If this holds locally, as might be expected classically, then by applying Lorentz invariance we
get −T 0
0 = −T 1
1 = −T 2
2 = −T 3
3 ≥T3ρ3. When the inequality (2.28) is saturated, the pressure
T m
m should vanish by analogy to the no-force condition. Away from extremality T m
m −T µ
µ
generally increases, by analogy to the weak energy condition, so the inequality (2.26) follows.
The O planes that do not satisfy the bound (2.26) are able to evade it because the necessary
supercharges do not exist: they are projected out by the orientifold. The D7-branes that
arise in F-theory compactiﬁcations saturate the bound because they preserve an N = 1
supersymmetry that is also preserved by D3-branes.
2.2.2
Solution of the constraints
In terms of the potential α the Bianchi identity (2.23) becomes
˜∇2α = ie2AGmnp(∗6G
mnp)
12 Im τ
+ 2e−6A∂mα∂me4A + 2κ10
2e2AT3ρloc
3
,
(2.29)
where ∗6 is the dual in the transverse directions. Subtracting this from the Einstein equation
constraint (2.15) gives
˜∇2(e4A −α) =
e2A
6 Im τ
iG(3) −∗6G(3)

2+e−6A|∂(e4A −α)|2+2κ10
2e2A
1
4(T m
m −T µ
µ )loc−T3ρloc
3

.
(2.30)
The LHS integrates to zero, while under the assumption (2.26) the RHS is nonnegative.
Thus, if the inequality (2.26) holds, then
• The 3-form ﬁeld strength is imaginary self-dual,
∗6G(3) = iG(3) .
(2.31)
• The warp-factor and 4-form potential are related,
e4A = α .
(2.32)
10

PAGE 11
• The inequality (2.26) is actually saturated.
Assuming this form, let use review the full set of ﬁeld equations and Bianchi identities.
The 5-form ﬁeld strength (2.9) is self-dual by construction. Its ﬁeld strength/Bianchi iden-
tity (2.29) is consistent and determines α and A, provided that the total D3 charge (2.24)
vanishes. The 3-form Bianchi identities
dF(3) = dH(3) = 0
(2.33)
must be imposed. Using these, the equation of motion then takes the form
dΛ +
i
Im τ dτ ∧Re Λ = 0 ,
Λ = e4A∗6G(3) −iαG(3) ,
(2.34)
and so is satisﬁed as a consequence of eqs. (2.31, 2.32). The Rµν equation also follows from
these conditions. Finally, the remaining ﬁeld equations reduce to
˜Rmn = κ10
2∂mτ∂n¯τ + ∂nτ∂m¯τ
4(Im τ)2
+ κ10
2

˜T D7
mn −1
8˜gmn ˜T D7

,
(2.35)
˜∇2τ =
˜∇τ · ˜∇τ
i Im τ
−4κ2
10(Im τ)2
√−g
δ ˜SD7
δ¯τ
.
(2.36)
These are the equations determining a solution to F-theory in the supergravity approxima-
tion.
In summary, assuming that the localized sources satisfy (2.26), the necessary and suﬃ-
cient conditions for a solution are an underlying manifold f
M6 ≡(˜gmn, τ) satisfying (2.35, 2.36),
closed 3-form ﬂuxes F(3) and H(3) such that G(3) is imaginary self-dual, and vanishing total
D3 charge.
2.2.3
Supersymmetry, and relation to previous solutions
The conditions for N = 1 supersymmetry of such a solution have recently been considered
in refs. [29, 30] for constant dilaton, and in ref. [31] more generally. The underlying manifold
must be K¨ahler and the connection ˜Dm −i
2Qm must lie in SU(3), where Qm is constructed
from τ as in [32].
The ﬂux G(3) must be a (2,1) form and primitive, meaning that the
index structure is ¯ıjk and the contraction with the K¨ahler form J¯ıj vanishes. The condition
∗6G(3) = iG(3) allows a primitive (2, 1) piece and a (0, 3) piece.7 Thus our general solution
is supersymmetric if and only if the (0, 3) part vanishes.
7It also allows a (1, 2) piece of the form K(2) ∧ω(1) where K(2) is the K¨ahler form and ω(1) is a nontrivial
closed (0, 1)-form. A compact Calabi-Yau manifold has no such (0, 1)-form, and neither do the Calabi-Yau
orientifolds or F-theory compactiﬁcations we consider. Note that in our conventions for the complex basis,
ǫ123123 = −i.
11

PAGE 12
In general, supersymmetric and nonsupersymmetric solutions are both possible, though
the latter are more generic. Consider for example the T 6/Z2 orientifold. This is somewhat
special because it has N = 4 supersymmetry in the absence of G-ﬂux, but it serves for
illustration. In terms of three complex coordinates, the primitive ﬂuxes G¯123, G1¯23, and G12¯3
can be turned on consistent with the quantization conditions (2.25) (these ﬁx τ and some
of the K¨ahler moduli), leaving N = 1 supersymmetry. If the additional ﬂux G¯1¯2¯3 is nonzero
then all supersymmetry is broken.
Noncompact solutions of this form have previously been described in ref. [29] in the special
case of constant dilaton. The supersymmetric solutions are dual [8, 33] to the M theory
solutions of ref. [34]. As emphasized in ref. [31] these solutions are special, in the sense that
the N = 1 supersymmetry lies in an N = 4 subgroup of the full N = 8 IIB supersymmetry.
In IIB form, this is the subgroup preserved by a space-ﬁlling D3-brane; in M theory form
it is the subgroup preserved by a space-ﬁlling M2-brane. F-theory compactiﬁcations on CY
fourfolds preserve N = 1 supersymmetry in the presence of D3 branes (and in fact are limits
of the M theory solutions of [34]). Therefore, we can infer that they are solutions of this
special form, though we have not displayed this by computing and explicitly comparing the
contributions of (the fully generalized forms of) (2.21) and (2.20) for the wrapped 7-branes.
2.2.4
Moduli and eﬀective actions
The necessary and suﬃcient conditions (2.24, 2.31, 2.33, 2.35, 2.36) are all invariant under
rescaling ˜gmn →λ2˜gmn. Thus,
• All special solutions have a radial modulus.
Thus our goal of ﬁxing the moduli in a warped compactiﬁcation is limited in this class of
solutions to leaving at least this one. On the other hand, there is no dilaton modulus, because
the dilaton couples diﬀerently to the NS-NS and R-R 3-form ﬂuxes and so has a nontrivial
potential. This suggests that it may be an interesting exercise to look for solutions having
no classical moduli by introducing sources not satisfying the inequality (2.26) [20].
This is slightly subtle, because the solution itself does not scale simply.
In the ﬁeld
equation (2.15), the terms involving derivatives of A scale like λ−2, and the ﬂux source term
scales like λ−6. It follows that at large radius e4A = 1 + O(λ−4) and so the warp factor
approaches a constant. At radii less than O(N1/4α′1/2) the warping becomes signiﬁcant.
The properties of the nonsupersymmetric solutions — vanishing four-dimensional cosmo-
logical constant and a radial modulus in spite of the absence of supersymmetry — identiﬁes
12

PAGE 13
them as no-scale models [19, 21, 22]. The combination of broken supersymmetry with vanish-
ing cosmological constant is intriguing, but there is no known reason that it should survive
quantum corrections, from instantons and even perturbative loops. Even at string tree level,
α′ corrections to the supergravity ﬁeld equations presumably spoil the no-scale structure.
Let us also consider the eﬀective four-dimensional action. Before turning on ﬂuxes, there
will be massless ﬁelds corresponding to the K¨ahler and complex structure moduli; we denote
the latter zα. Furthermore, for orientifold models, the dilaton ﬁeld τ is massless, whereas
in general F-theory models it is ﬁxed in terms of the complex structure moduli by (2.36).
For the moment we consider the case of a single K¨ahler modulus, the radial modulus, in a
four-dimensional superﬁeld ρ.
For a large-radius CY or orientifold, the K¨ahler potential follows by dimensionally reduc-
ing the 10d action.8 For the radius we ﬁnd
K(ρ) = −3 ln[−i(ρ −¯ρ)] ,
(2.37)
and for the dilaton and complex structure moduli
K(τ, zα) = −ln[−i(τ −¯τ)] −ln

−i
Z
M Ω∧¯Ω

(2.38)
where Ωis the holomorphic (3, 0) form. The latter expression follows from the Weil-Petersson
metric, and is discussed in [35]. An obvious conjecture for the F-theory generalization of
(2.38) is
K = −ln
Z
X Ω4 ∧¯Ω4

(2.39)
where X and Ω4 denote the CY fourfold and its holomorphic (4, 0) form respectively.
The ﬂuxes generate a superpotential, which takes the form [8]
W =
Z
M Ω∧G(3) .
(2.40)
This is independent of ρ. The expected F-theory generalization of this formula takes the
form [8]
W =
Z
X Ω4 ∧G(4) .
(2.41)
In (2.41), G(4) denotes the four-form ﬂux one would get in M-theory by compactifying the
F-theory on a circle; it can be expressed in terms of type IIB quantities in the F-theory
8For further discussion see the appendix.
13

PAGE 14
limit. If the one works with a local trivialization of the elliptic ﬁbration, for example in the
vicinity of the conifold point, with ﬁber coordinate w, the four form G(4) takes the form
G(4) = −G(3)d ¯w
τ −¯τ + h.c. .
(2.42)
We will further discuss issues surrounding use of such a trivialization in section four.
Under these conditions the N = 1 supergravity potential simpliﬁes [19],
V =
1
2κ2
10
eK
Ga¯bDaWDbW −3|W|2
→
1
2κ2
10
eK
Gi¯DiWDjW

,
(2.43)
where DaW = ∂aW + W∂aK and Ga¯b = ∂a∂¯bK, and the indices a, b are summed over
superﬁelds, with i, j labeling indices excluding ρ.
In no-scale models the |DρW|2 term
cancels the negative term, leaving a nonnegative potential. When DaW = 0 the potential
vanishes; this condition is independent of ρ, so if there are n superﬁelds besides ρ it represents
n equations on n moduli and leaves ρ undetermined. Generically at these solutions W̸ = 0,
so DρW = −3W/(ρ −ρ) is nonzero and supersymmetry is broken.
A useful check on these expressions comes by comparing the 4d and 10d equations. In
the CY/orientifold case, one readily ﬁnds (see appendix)
0 = DαW ≡∂αW + (∂αK)W =
Z
M G(3) ∧χα ,
0 = DτW ≡∂τW + (∂τK)W =
1
¯τ −τ
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω,
(2.44)
where χα is a basis of (2, 1) forms on M. These equations imply that G(3) is imaginary
self-dual, in correspondence to the 10d condition (2.31). For F-theory, deﬁne a basis of (3, 1)
forms χA on X; the expected generalization of (2.44) is
0 = DAW =
Z
X G(4) ∧χA .
(2.45)
While our discussion so far has focused on the case where there is only one K¨ahler
modulus, ρ, a general model may have several K¨ahler moduli ρi. The required modiﬁcation
of this discussion is quite simple. The superpotential is independent of all of the ρi. It should
then follow that the K¨ahler metric for the K¨ahler deformations produces an analog of the
simpliﬁcation (2.43), where now the greek indices sum over moduli excluding the ρi. One
way to see this is from the 10d picture – the condition (2.31), whose correspondence with the
14

PAGE 15
4d potentials was just seen, is independent of the K¨ahler moduli. So the no-scale structure
survives, with each of the K¨ahler moduli persisting as a ﬂat direction at this order. Because
it is not diﬃcult to ﬁnd models with only a single K¨ahler modulus ρ, we will assume that
this is the case in the rest of the paper.
In the appendix we discuss further the derivation of the four-dimensional action by dimen-
sional reduction and the correspondence between the four-dimensional and ten-dimensional
pictures.
3
Warped solutions and hierarchies
In section 2 we discussed various global features of IIB compactiﬁcations with a nontrivial
warp factor. We now turn to the local structure of the warped region.
We begin by reviewing the solutions of Verlinde [4], corresponding to D3 branes on a
compact manifold. If N D3-branes are coincident, the warp factor in their vicinity is
e−4A ≈4πgsN
˜r4
,
(3.1)
with ˜r the distance from the D3-branes in the ˜gmn metric. Near the D3-branes the geometry
is thus AdS5 × S5, producing a large warp factor [4]. At larger values of ˜r, the product
structure breaks down due to the curvature of M6, and eventually ˜r ceases to be a good
coordinate [36]: M6 is not globally the product of a ﬁve-sphere and a one dimensional
space. This is similar to the RS2 model [2], though is a bona-ﬁde compactiﬁcation, with the
compact manifold playing a role roughly analogous to the so-called “Planck brane” of [2],
and yielding a ﬁnite four-dimensional Planck scale. The warp factor of course diverges as
˜r →0, which is at inﬁnite spatial distance.
If such a model is realized on an orientifold, the dilaton is a constant, eφ = gs, but in the
more general context of an F-theory compactiﬁcation it varies holomorphically as determined
by (2.36) or equivalently by the eight-dimensional construction. As we will discuss in section
4.2, the physics near the D3-branes is essentially the same, and the eﬀective value of gs is
determined by the value of τ at the D3-branes.
To get a large but ﬁnite hierarchy, one or more D3-branes must be separated from the
rest by a small distance ˜r. These might be the branes on which the Standard Model ﬁelds
live, or they might be associated with some symmetry breaking that couples to the Standard
Model through the bulk. However, the D3-brane coordinates have no potential. Thus in the
present model there is nothing that ﬁxes ˜r and so the size of the hierarchy.
15

PAGE 16
In order to ﬁnd a warped solution that produces a large but stable hierarchy, we now add
ﬂuxes. Our motivation stems from the work of Klebanov-Strassler [7]. The basic idea is that
locally in the vicinity of a conifold point, KS have found solutions with ﬂuxes that generate
smooth supergravity solutions with large relative warpings. Here we will extend this work
to the compact context.
CY manifolds are generically nonsingular, but at special values of the parameters they
can develop singularities. The most generic singular space is a conifold [14]. Locally this can
be described as the submanifold of C4 deﬁned by
w2
1 + w2
2 + w2
3 + w2
4 = 0 .
(3.2)
This submanifold is singular at (w1, w2, w3, w4) = 0. The geometry of this space, including
its Calabi-Yau metric, is described in ref. [14]. It is important that this is a good singularity,
meaning that string theory makes sense in such a space [37]. Although the compactiﬁcation
space f
M6 we are using is either the base of a nontrivial elliptic ﬁbration, or is an orientifold
of a Calabi-Yau, the local structure of a singularity like (3.2) will not be aﬀected by these
global details, so we can use local facts about CY singularities in the ensuing discussion.
The conifold singularity can be regarded as a cone whose base has the topology S3×S2. At
the singular point, both the S3 and the S2 shrink to zero size. The conifold can be smoothed
into a nonsingular CY manifold in two ways. In the small resolution of the conifold, the
S2 is blown up to ﬁnite size. In the deformed conifold, the S3 is expanded to ﬁnite size; it
is this that will be relevant for us. The deformed conifold has a simple description as the
submanifold
w2
1 + w2
2 + w2
3 + w2
4 = z .
(3.3)
Here the complex parameter z is the modulus which controls the size of the S3.
We now consider adding ﬂuxes to this geometry, and ﬁnd the resulting potential for the
moduli. Consider a compact manifold with moduli z, ρ, and τ (we explain at the end of
this subsection how additional complex structure moduli ui can be incorporated, without
substantially modifying the results).9 Dirac quantization implies that these ﬂuxes, integrated
over all of the three-cycles of the CY, be integers as in (2.25). In the vicinity of the conifold,
there are two relevant cycles. Examining the equation (3.3), and taking z to be real and
positive for convenience, the three-cycle which vanishes as z →0 (denoted A) can be taken
to be the S3 on which all of the wi are real. In general compact examples, there also exists a
dual B-cycle which intersects A exactly once. An example of such a cycle in this noncompact
9More generally, in the case of an F-theory compactiﬁcation, the following should be generalized using
sections as outlined in (2.8), (2.42).
16

PAGE 17
case can be constructed by taking w1,2,3 to be imaginary and w4 real and positive. The KS
solution corresponds to M units of F(3) on the A-cycle. The ﬁeld equation in KS requires
that H(3) be supported on the dual cycle to F(3), so let there be −K units on the B-cycle:
1
2πα′
Z
A F(3) = 2πM ,
1
2πα′
Z
B H(3) = −2πK .
(3.4)
This can also be understood by requiring D3 charge conservation as in (2.24):
1
2κ2
10T3
Z
M H(3) ∧F(3) = MK .
(3.5)
Thus, in the sense of Poincar´e duality, we can write
F(3) = (2π)2α′M[B] ,
H(3) = (2π)2α′K[A] .
(3.6)
This gives
W =
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω= (2π)2α′

M
Z
B Ω−Kτ
Z
A Ω

.
(3.7)
The integrals appearing here are the periods deﬁning the complex structure of the conifold.
In particular, the complex coordinate for the collapsing cycle A is deﬁned by
z =
Z
A Ω.
(3.8)
It is a standard result that on the dual cycle
Z
B Ω≡G(z) =
z
2πi ln z + holomorphic .
(3.9)
The superpotential is then
W = (2π)2α′(MG(z) −Kτz) .
(3.10)
Such a superpotential has been obtained previously by Vafa [9].
Let us consider ﬁrst the DzW condition,
0 = DzW ∝M∂zG −Kτ + ∂zK(MG −Kτz) .
(3.11)
In order to obtain a large hierarchy we will take K/gs to be large: this will result in z being
exponentially small. This has a simple interpretation in the dual gauge theory, as we will
discuss later in this section. In this regime, the dominant terms in DzW are
DzW ∝M
2πi ln z −iK
gs
+ O(1) ,
(3.12)
17

PAGE 18
It follows that for K/Mgs ≫1, z is indeed exponentially small,
z ∼exp(−2πK/Mgs) .
(3.13)
Thus, we obtain a large hierarchy of scales if, for example, M = 1 and K/gs is of order 5.
As things stand, the Dτ equation
0 = DτW ∝
1
¯τ −τ (−Kz¯τ + MG)
(3.14)
cannot be satisﬁed. The ﬁrst term in parentheses is exponentially small, while the second is
not because the holomorphic part in (3.9) is generically nonvanishing, G(0) = O(1). Note
that this is a property of the compact case. In the noncompact case of interest in KS, the
bulk modulus τ is frozen and there is no corresponding DτW equation to impose.
The problem arises because at z = 0 the superpotential (3.10) is independent of τ,
and the remedy is to consider a conﬁguration with additional τ dependence. With such
τ dependence, one can generically ﬁnd a solution to (3.14) with z ≈0, though additional
structure may be required to ensure that this minimum is at weak coupling. To give one
example, τ can be stabilized by turning on additional ﬂuxes. Keeping for simplicity the case
of a single complex structure modulus z, there are 2 + 2b2,1 = 4 3-cycles, namely the pair
(A, B) and an additional pair (A′, B′). Turning on −K′ units of H(3) on the B′ cycle gives
W = (2π)2α′ [MG(z) −τ(Kz + K′z′)]
(3.15)
where z′ is a function of z which is generically nonvanishing at z = 0, z′(z) = O(1). Then if
we ﬁx z = 0, the DτW equation is
0 = DτW ∝
1
¯τ −τ [−K′z′(0)¯τ + MG(0)] ,
(3.16)
thus ﬁxing the dilaton at
¯τ = MG(0)
K′z′(0) .
(3.17)
The hierarchy becomes
z ∼exp
2πK
K′ Im[G(0)/z′(0)]

(3.18)
Thus, by appropriate choices of K, K′, and M one obtains an exponential hierarchy with
the dilaton ﬁxed at an interesting value.
The hierarchy is determined in terms of integer ﬂuxes and the Calabi-Yau geometry. To
obtain the actual warp factor requires solving the diﬀerential equation (2.14), but one can
18

PAGE 19
estimate it as follows. The D3-brane warp factor (3.1) is e4A ∼˜r4. The resolution of the
conifold cuts this oﬀat w2
i ∼z. According to ref. [14], the conic coordinate ˜r (which is ρ in
the notation of that paper) is ˜r ∝w2/3 ∝z1/3, and so the hierarchy of energy scales is
eAmin ∼z1/3 ∼exp(−2πK/3Mgs) .
(3.19)
In eﬀect the ﬂuxes produce a model similar to RS1 [1], in which the warp factor does not go
to zero but to a small positive value.10
The large hierarchy (3.13) has a simple interpretation in terms of a dual gauge theory.
The KS solution is the supergravity dual to a nonconformal N = 1 gauge theory, with
conﬁnement and chiral symmetry breaking at a dynamically generated scale [7].
In the
spirit of the Verlinde model [4], the low energy physics of our supergravity solutions is
equivalent to this gauge theory coupled to the massless bulk ﬁelds of the compactiﬁcation.
The KS solution begins with N whole D3-branes and M fractional D3-branes at a conifold
singularity. In the end all of these branes are replaced by ﬂux; their moduli disappear, which
is in accord with conﬁnement in the dual gauge theory. In particular, with M units of F(3)
on the A cycle and K units of H(3) on the dual B cycle, the total D3 charge is N = MK.11
The formula (3.19) then corresponds precisely to the renormalization group analysis
of KS [7].
Using the β-function in their eq. (23), one cascade takes place on a ratio of
scales e2π/3Mgs (during which the LHS of that equation changes from −2π/gs to +2π/gs).
The total number of cascades is N/M = K, because M units of D3 charge disappear at
each cascade, giving the total hierarchy (3.19). Thus the four-dimensional eﬀective action
correctly reproduces the physics of the KS gauge theory.
In the gauge theory, the parameter z is the scale of gluino condensation. The instability
noted in eq. (3.14) is the familiar fact that a gluino condensate generates a dilaton poten-
tial [22]. The stabilization (3.16) does not have a gauge theory origin; rather, it is a bulk
eﬀect in the IIB theory.
There is an eﬀect which might have been expected to destabilize the large hierarchy, but
does not do so. The dual gauge theory has various relevant perturbations; for example, the
N = 1 supersymmetry allows a superpotential. This would produce a mass gap which is of
order the perturbation, rather than exponentially small. This perturbation is absent in our
solution: in supergravity language it is a 3-form ﬂux, but it is not of the form ∗6G(3) = iG(3),
10We should note that, unlike RS1, there is no negative tension brane at the low energy end; rather, there
is a KS space. The negative tension objects that we require are elsewhere on the compact space, in the
region that replaces the RS Planck brane.
11In order to obtain an interesting low energy spectrum, one may need additional ‘mobile’ D3-branes in
the warped region, but this is beyond our present focus.
19

PAGE 20
as one sees from the explicit expressions in section III.C of ref. [38]. The reason for its
absence appears to be holomorphy: the gauge theory perturbation corresponds to a growing
(nonnormalizable) mode as one move away from the origin, and evidently this cannot be
extended to the full compact space.
So far, we have assumed that there is a single complex structure parameter z. Suppose
there are other complex structure deformations, controlled by moduli ui. In such a case,
the ui enter in the regular terms in the period (3.9), so G(z) is really G(z, ui). Generically,
assuming that z has been successfully stabilized near the conifold point in moduli space as
above, the equations
DuiW|z=0 = 0
(3.20)
can be solved to yield ﬁxed (order 1) values for the other moduli ui. So we see that the
presence of background RR and NS ﬂuxes generically serves to ﬁx all of the complex moduli
and the dilaton, while leaving the K¨ahler modulus ρ unﬁxed.
4
Examples
In order to make our discussion of warped compactiﬁcations with ﬂuxes more explicit and
concrete, and in particular check our ability to build consistent solutions with both negative
D3 charge/tension and the above ﬂux conﬁgurations, we now turn to the construction of some
explicit models. We brieﬂy describe models based on O3-folds, and then discuss F-theory
compactiﬁcations in detail.
4.1
O3 models
Models in which the negative tension objects are O3 planes are easily described. Begin with
a CY manifold with a conifold singularity and a Z2 symmetry that has isolated ﬁxed points,
and orientifold on this symmetry. Since we assuming that the O3 planes are distant from the
singularity, the initial CY must actually have two conifold singularities which are images of
one another. The D3 charge of the O3 planes is then −1
4 times the number of ﬁxed points. In
order that the supergravity description be good, we need gsN to be somewhat greater than
one. To work in perturbative string theory we should also assume that gs ≤1. Therefore,
we need N, and hence the number of ﬁxed points, to be large.
We will not present explicit examples, deferring an explicit example to the discussion of
F-theory, but we will present some details of the orientifold construction and the low energy
spectrum.
20

PAGE 21
Let us ﬁrst determine which of the RR ﬁelds survive the orientifolding by RΩ, where R
is the Z2 with isolated ﬁxed points, and Ωis world-sheet parity. First, consider a T k/Z2
orientifold, where we can use T-duality to relate this to Ωin the IIB string [25],
RΩ= T −1ΩT .
(4.1)
Consider a Ramond ﬁeld with r indices in the direction of the k-torus and s in the orthogonal
directions. In the IIB string, the operator Ωacts as ir+s−2 on RR potentials and ir+s−3 on
RR ﬂuxes; thus, for example, the RR two-form potential survives the projection to the type I
string. The T-duality takes r to k −r. Thus, ΩR acts as i−r+s+k−2 or i−r+s+k−3 respectively.
We can also phrase this as the statement that the intrinsic ΩR of these ﬁelds is respectively
in+k−2 or in+k−3, where n is the total number of indices.
This intrinsic parity must be
combined with (−1)r, from the explicit action of the R on the indices. For the value k = 6
relevant here, the intrinsic parities are respectively in and in−1.
Thus, the Ramond scalar C has even intrinsic parity, as expected because it is the
superpartner of the dilaton. Similarly aµν, the axionic part of ρ, has even intrinsic parity:
Cµνpq = aµν ˜Jpq ,
(4.2)
where ˜J is the K¨ahler form.
The orientifolding requires that the Z2 symmetry hold throughout the moduli space and
so only complex structure moduli that are even survive. The R-R ﬂux Fmnp has odd intrinsic
parity, as does the NS-NS ﬂux Hmnp (from the action of Ω). Thus these must be proportional
to 3-forms of odd intrinsic parity to survive the projection. Note that the 3-form Ω(not to be
confused with the world-sheet parity operator) also has odd intrinsic parity. This is because
it is nowhere vanishing and so in particular is nonzero at the ﬁxed points; at the ﬁxed points
the Z2 gives an explicit −1 from the indices and this must be oﬀset by the intrinsic parity.
It follows that the superpotential
Z
Ω∧G(3)
(4.3)
is well-deﬁned on the covering space. Also, the even complex structure deformations gener-
ate, by contraction with Ω, odd (2, 1) forms, so these are the appropriate ﬂuxes to excite.
Models of this class can be analyzed exactly as in section 3.
One can choose ﬂuxes
through the A and B cycles of the conifold (with the D3 charge being canceled by the O3
planes), and obtain precisely the eﬀective ﬁeld theory for z, ρ and τ described there.
21

PAGE 22
4.2
F theory models
Another general class of warped models arises from F-theory compactiﬁcations to four di-
mensions. In such models the possible conﬁgurations of branes and ﬂuxes are constrained
by the topology of the elliptic Calabi-Yau fourfold X →M, via the equation
χ(X)
24
= ND3 +
1
2κ2
10T3
Z
M H3 ∧F3 .
(4.4)
The left-hand side of this equation arises from the induced D3 brane charge on the wrapped
D7 branes, and this charge must be compensated by introducing either wandering D3 branes
or appropriate ﬂuxes in the base M of the elliptic ﬁbration.
In general one could also
introduce nontrivial gauge bundles in the wrapped D7 branes (which would yield another
term on the right-hand side of (4.4), corresponding to the instanton number in each D7-brane
gauge theory), but we will not need to use this freedom. Because χ ≫1 is attainable for
Calabi-Yau fourfolds, this class of models should allow a great deal of freedom in choosing
appropriate ﬂux and brane conﬁgurations for model building. Earlier discussions of fourfold
compactiﬁcations with nontrivial ﬂuxes can be found in [34, 8, 33, 40].
Because of SL(2, Z) monodromies around the (p, q) 7-branes wrapping surfaces in M, the
ﬂuxes should really be viewed as transforming as sections of a nontrivial bundle (as detailed
in section 2.1). However, we will focus our attention on a local region around a conifold
singularity in the base M, and will write our formulae in terms of a local trivialization of
this bundle. This is particularly simple in orientifold limits of F-theory vacua, and we will
be most explicit there. Since the most general F-theory model does have an orientifold locus
in its moduli space [41], this does not constitute a serious loss of generality.
4.2.1
The Fourfold
To embed the Klebanov-Strassler system into an F-theory compactiﬁcation, we need to
exhibit an elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau fourfold X which admits a conifold singularity in
its base M. A simple example can be designed as follows (the generalization to construct
other examples is straightforward).
Consider for M the hypersurface given by a quartic equation in P 4
P = z2
5(
4
X
i=1
z2
i ) −t2z4
5 +
4
X
i=1
z4
i = 0
(4.5)
where zi are the homogeneous coordinates on P 4, and t is for convenience taken to be a real
parameter. One can construct a fourfold X over M by specifying a Weierstrass model (see,
22

PAGE 23
e.g., [42])
y2 = x3 + xf(zi) + g(zi)
(4.6)
where y ∈3L, x ∈2L, f ∈H0(4L) and g ∈H0(6L); here L is the line bundle given by
L = −KM in terms of the canonical bundle of M. In practice for this model, we can think of
f and g as being polynomials of degree 4 and 6 in the homogeneous coordinates zi (restricted
to M).
In type IIB language, one should think of the model (4.6) as corresponding to a compact-
iﬁcation of IIB string theory on the quartic in P 4, with various (p, q) 7-branes appearing at
the loci where the elliptic ﬁbration degenerates, i.e. where the discriminant
∆= 4f 3 + 27g2
(4.7)
vanishes. The physics associated with such degenerations involves enhanced gauge symmetry
and more exotic phenomena, and is described for many cases which arise in compactiﬁcation
on CY threefolds in [43, 44, 45]. However, for our interests we want a degeneration of the
base which is unrelated to the physics of the 7 branes, and we will simply insure that the
loci in M of interest to us do not intersect the ∆= 0 discriminant locus. For later reference,
the value of the IIB axion-dilaton τ is determined in terms of the Weierstrass data by the
equation
j(τ) =
4(24f)3
4f 3 + 27g2
(4.8)
where j(τ) is the modular invariant function of τ, normalized so that j(i) = (24)3.
Eqn. (2.22) gives the background D3 charge for this conﬁguration. For the model (4.6),
one can evaluate χ by using the formula in [42], with the result that
−QD7
3
= χ
24 = 12 + 15
Z
M c1(M)3 = 72 .
(4.9)
Inspection of (4.5) reveals that M has a conifold singularity as t →0 – one can solve
P = dP = 0 at (0, 0, 0, 0, 1). The collapsing three-cycle can in fact be exhibited explicitly, as
the ﬁxed point locus of the involution zi →zi. On this locus, the zi must be real. One can
see from (4.5) that without loss of generality on the real locus z5̸ = 0, so we can take z5 = 1
and ﬁx the projective symmetry. Denote the real part of zi by xi. The equation becomes
4
X
i=1
(x4
i + x2
i ) = t2
(4.10)
23

PAGE 24
and by deﬁning ui =
q
x4
i + x2
i , and choosing the branch of the square root where sgn(ui) =
sgn(xi), we get a 1-1 map onto the locus
4
X
i=1
u2
i = t2
(4.11)
which describes an S3 that collapses as t →0. This is the A-cycle of the conifold.
4.2.2
Orientifold Limit
Following the work of Sen [41] we can present X on a locus in its moduli space where it has
a particularly simple description, as a type IIB orientifold. Choose f and g so that they
satisfy
f = Cη(zi) −3h(zi)2,
g = h(zi)[Cη(zi) −2h(zi)2]
(4.12)
with h, η arbitrary functions of degrees 2 and 4. Since f is quartic this allows for a generic
choice of f, but is a specialization of the choice of g. Then from (4.8) it is clear that as
C →0 with η and h ﬁxed, j(τ) →∞wherever the numerator does not vanish. This means
τ →i∞almost everywhere on the base, i.e. we are at weak type IIB coupling.
In fact in this limit, the model becomes an orientifold of type IIB on a Calabi-Yau
threefold c
M.
c
M is a double cover of M, speciﬁed by the equation (4.5) together with
ξ2 −h(zi) = 0
(4.13)
where ξ is a new coordinate (valued in the line bundle L). We orientifold c
M by the action
ξ →−ξ
(4.14)
composed with Ω(−1)FL which ﬁxes the locus ξ = 0, yielding an O7 plane localized at
h(zi) = 0 in (4.5).
One must also introduce D7 branes to cancel the RR tadpole generated by the orientifold.
Inspecting the discriminant ∆, which is
∆= C2η2(4Cη −9h2)
(4.15)
in the limit (4.12), one can see that there are a pair of D7 branes located at η(zi) = 0 in c
M.
24

PAGE 25
4.2.3
Embedding Klebanov-Strassler
We have now reduced F-theory on X to IIB string theory on the orientifold of c
M by (4.14).
Recall that as t →0, there is a conifold singularity in M, which survives in the orientifold
of IIB on c
M. We can choose h and η to be of the form
h(zi) =
5
X
i=1
aiz2
i ,
η(zi) =
5
X
i=1
biz4
i
(4.16)
with ai and bi real and positive. With such a choice, the loci h = 0 and η = 0 where the
O7 and D7s are located do not intersect the real slice of M. But the collapsing three-cycle
in
c
M as t2 →0 lies on this real slice. Therefore, the D7 branes and O7 plane do not lie
near the conifold singularity, and we can work in a local neighborhood of the conifold in the
orientifold of c
M while ignoring these other branes.
At the conifold point there is a collapsing A cycle in
c
M, as well as a dual B cycle
in
c
M which it intersects once. We expect to be able to put ﬂux through both of these,
consistent with the orientifold projection. The background charge (4.9) is still in force in
the orientifold limit (the D3 charge comes from the induced charge on the wrapped branes);
and can be cancelled by choosing appropriate H3 and F3 ﬂuxes through these cycles. If we
choose to put M units of RR three-form ﬂux through A and K units of NS three-form ﬂux
through B, with MK = N ≤72, then (4.4) can be satisﬁed (for N < 72, we should add
wandering D3 branes or turn on other ﬂuxes to saturate (4.4)). This allows us to reproduce
locally, in a neighborhood of the conifold point in (the orientifold of)
c
M, the solution of
Klebanov and Strassler [7]. That is, the local geometry is the same as the gravity dual of
the SU(N + M) × SU(N) gauge theory considered there. Even with the values of M and K
which are possible in this model (much larger values of χ, and thus larger values of K, are
possible in other examples), one can generate a large hierarchy from the RG cascade, as we
have demonstrated in section 3.
Stabilizing the dilaton in such an orientifold requires some other generic addition to the
low-energy superpotential. One way to accomplish this is to turn on additional ﬂuxes, as
discussed in §3. An alternative is to work at generic points in the F-theory moduli space,
which we discuss below.
4.2.4
Deforming Away from the Orientifold Limit
To understand the low energy physics governing an orientifold model with a conifold sin-
gularity and appropriate ﬂuxes, one should compute the eﬀective ﬁeld theory governing (at
least) three diﬀerent moduli, as described in §3. These are the complex modulus z which
25

PAGE 26
controls the volume of the collapsing three-cycle at the conifold, the dilaton τ, and the overall
volume of the space ρ.
In our F-theory situation, however, we could consider moving away from the limit of
§4.2.2, so that the model is not a perturbative IIB orientifold. Working away from the orien-
tifold limit while keeping the F3 and H3 ﬂuxes as before, one achieves some simpliﬁcation.12
While ρ (the size of the base M) and z (here controlled by t2 in (4.5)) remain moduli in the
F-theory picture, the dilaton does not remain an independent modulus. It is ﬁxed in terms
of the complex structure of X by the equation (2.36), with solution (4.8).
This means that the naive problem with solving the DτW = 0 equation in the vicinity
of the conifold point, solved in §3 by for example turning on an additional ﬂux, will not
occur here.
τ does not appear as an independent mode in the low-energy eﬀective ﬁeld
theory. The modes controlling the complex structure of X, which determine τ via (4.8), are
frozen on general grounds by just the Klebanov-Strassler ﬂuxes, as described at the end of
§3. Although our discussion there was in terms of perturbative type IIB string theory, there
is an alternative derivation which goes through M-theory. One can view F-theory on X as
being deﬁned by a limit of M-theory on X (where one shrinks the volume of the elliptic
ﬁber in going from M-theory to F-theory). The superpotential for complex structure moduli
in M-theory on X is given by the formula (2.41) where G(4) is the M-theory four-form ﬂux
and Ω4 is the holomorphic (4,0) form on X. The formula (3.7) for the IIB string theory
superpotential follows from (2.41) in the F-theory limit, for suitable choices of G(4) (those
which lift to G(3) ﬂux in IIB language) and in the case that X is a Calabi-Yau threefold times
a two-torus. In the more general F-theory case, X is not such a product, but nevertheless
the A and B cycle in M that we have been using lift to 4-cycles in X and allow use of the
local decomposition (2.42). The statement that the complex moduli (and therefore the value
of τ at the conifold point in M) are ﬁxed then follows from the fact that the period of Ω4
over the lift of the B cycle will have generic dependence on the complex structure moduli.
We saw in §3 that ﬁxing the dilaton, either by this mechanism or by turning on additional
ﬂuxes, allows one to solve for z. The exponentially small value of z computed from the su-
perpotential of [9] independently conﬁrms the existence of a hierarchy for reasonable choices
of M and N (and represents the small, dynamically generated scale of chiral symmetry
breaking in [7]).
12Note that ﬂuxes which were projected in by the orientifold action are guaranteed to adiabatically deform
to consistent G(4) ﬂuxes in the full CY fourfold geometry.
26

PAGE 27
5
Conclusion
There has been a great deal of interest in ﬁnding string theory constructions which produce
large hierarchies through warping, and in particular reproduce, at long wavelengths, features
of the RS1 model [1]. Building on the ideas of Verlinde and collaborators [4, 36], we have
described orientifold and F-theory models which accomplish this. The role of the AdS throat
and the infrared brane is played by (a ﬁnite radial segment of) the gravity dual to a conﬁning
gauge theory found by Klebanov and Strassler [7], while the UV brane is replaced by the
bulk of the string theory compactiﬁcation manifold.
Our models are consistent, nonsingular string theory backgrounds. However, we expect
α′ and string loop corrections to generate a potential for the overall scale ρ of the compact-
iﬁcation manifold. An analogous problem also arises in familiar classical heterotic string
backgrounds [21, 22], and in some ways our models are quite similar to those (with the
important diﬀerence that non-perturbative gauge theory eﬀects have already been incorpo-
rated in the classical gravity solution). It would be very interesting to ﬁnd mechanisms for
stabilizing ρ in these models; toy models where all of the moduli are stabilized by ﬂuxes can
be constructed [20].
The duality between gauge theories and compactiﬁcations with ﬂux extends beyond the
single example [7] we have used here. The results of [9] provide a more general construction
of dualities between ﬂuxes and gauge theories, and quantum gauge theory eﬀects are again
calculable using classical geometry. It would be interesting to use other examples of this
gauge theory/ﬂux duality to construct N = 1 string compactiﬁcations with moduli which
are calculably stabilized by non-perturbative gauge dynamics.
Finally, it has recently become clear that warped compactiﬁcations oﬀer new mechanisms,
distinct from AdS redshifting, of producing large hierarchies [46]. The relevant warped mod-
els need to have two or more diﬀerent brane throats, with fairly generic warping (so power-law
warping is suﬃcient). Large hierarchies can then be produced by the tunneling-suppressed
(and therefore weak) interactions between the IR modes localized down distinct throats. It
should be possible to design string theory examples of such multi-throat compactiﬁcations
by generalizing the construction in our paper.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank P. Aspinwall, A. Grassi, S. Gubser, S. Gukov, G. Horowitz, S. Katz,
I. Klebanov, M. Schulz, E. Silverstein, C. Vafa, H. Verlinde and E. Witten for helpful dis-
cussions. This work was supported by National Science Foundation grants PHY99-07949
27

PAGE 28
and PHY97-22022, and by the DOE under contracts DE-FG-03-91ER40618 and DE-AC03-
76SF00515. The research of S.K. is supported in part by a David and Lucile Packard Foun-
dation Fellowship for Science and Engineering and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship.
A
Dimensional reduction
We now develop further the low energy eﬀective action, discussed in section 2.
Before
turning on ﬂuxes, the underlying manifold f
M generically has a large number of moduli and
corresponding massless supermultiplets in the four-dimensional low-energy eﬀective theory.
Turning on ﬂuxes deforms the geometry of the compactiﬁcation, and in the four-dimensional
eﬀective theory generates a potential for the massless moduli [8, 33].
A.1
Kinetic terms and K¨ahler potential
The allowed moduli depend on the topology of the compactiﬁcation, though one generically
has the universal K¨ahler modulus corresponding to overall rescaling of the six-dimensional
metric. This has partner aµν, arising from
Cµνpq = aµν ˜Jpq
(A.1)
where ˜J is the K¨ahler form. We work in the approximation of constant warp factor and
vanishing ˜F5; as discussed in section 2.2.4 this is valid in the large-radius limit (although
we expect our expressions to generalize beyond this). The eﬀective action for this K¨ahler
multiplet together with the 4d metric and dilaton can be found by computing the action
(2.3) with
ds2 = gµνdxµdxν + e2u(x)˜gmndymdyn
(A.2)
where ˜gmn is the metric of the compactiﬁcation. In doing so, we deﬁne the 4d Newton’s
constant κ2
4 = κ2
10/ ˜V where ˜V is the volume of f
M, and the Weyl rescaled metric g4 = e−6u˜g4.
We also dualize, da(2) = e−8u˜∗db, and deﬁne ρ = b/
√
2 + ie4u. The result is
S =
1
2κ2
4
Z
d4x (−˜g4)1/2
 
˜R4 −2 ∂µτ∂µ¯τ
|τ −¯τ|2 −6 ∂µρ∂µ¯ρ
|ρ −¯ρ|2
!
.
(A.3)
The kinetic terms for τ and ρ can thus be found from the K¨ahler potential
K1 = −ln[−i(τ −¯τ)] −3 ln[−i(ρ −¯ρ)] .
(A.4)
In the O3 case, both τ and ρ survive the projection. In the case of an F-theory compact-
iﬁcation, the D7-brane monodromies generally remove τ from the 4d spectrum, although τ
28

PAGE 29
varies as other complex structure moduli, e.g. parameterizing the locations of the D7 branes,
vary.
The remaining moduli are the other K¨ahler and complex structure deformations of the 6d
compactiﬁcation, or, in the F-theory context, of the eight-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold.
In the following, we imagine for deﬁniteness that
f
M is a Calabi-Yau orientifold, and we
discuss the complex structure moduli space of Calabi-Yau threefolds, but the relevant parts
of the story carry over also to the F-theory examples.
As shown by Candelas and de la Ossa [35], the eﬀective action for CY moduli is de-
termined by the Weil-Petersson metric on the moduli space, and one may derive a simple
expression for the corresponding K¨ahler potential. First note that on a general CY threefold
there are the following harmonic forms:
1. One (3,0) form Ω.
2. b2,1 primitive (2,1) forms χα.
3. Their (1,2) conjugates χα.
4. The (0,3) conjugate Ω.
These satisfy
∗6Ω= −iΩ,
∗6χα = iχα .
(A.5)
As discussed in section 4.2, only forms of odd intrinsic parity under the Z2 projection are
relevant. This includes Ωand a subset of the χα. In the subsequent analysis α is restricted
to this subset.
The metric for the complex structure deformations takes the form
Gα¯β = −
Z
M χα ∧χβ
Z
M Ω∧Ω
.
(A.6)
To ﬁnd the corresponding K¨ahler potential, let zα be coordinates on the complex structure
moduli space. Then it can be shown that ∂Ω/∂zα is (3, 0) + (2, 1), and more precisely that
there is a basis χα such that
∂Ω
∂zα = kα(z, ¯z)Ω+ χα .
(A.7)
Deﬁning
K2 = −ln

−i
Z
M Ω∧Ω

,
(A.8)
29

PAGE 30
one may then show
∂αK2 = −kα ,
(A.9)
and the equation
∂α∂¯βK2 = Gα¯β
(A.10)
gives the above metric.
In the context of an F-theory compactiﬁcation, an obvious generalization of (A.8) is
K = −ln
Z
X Ω4 ∧¯Ω4

.
(A.11)
A.2
The potential and superpotential
We now turn to the problem of ﬁnding the potential determined by the ﬂuxes. From (2.3),
the potential is determined by
SG = −
1
24κ2
10
Z
M d6y˜g1/2Gmnp ¯Gg
mnp
Im τ
.
(A.12)
Again, we are in a large-radius approximation where the warp factor is constant and ˜F(5) = 0.
We deﬁne the imaginary self-dual parts of G(3) as
G(3) = G+
(3) + G−
(3) ,
G±
(3) = 1
2(G(3) ± i∗6G(3)) ,
∗6G±
(3) = ∓iG±
(3) .
(A.13)
The action can then be written as
SG = −
1
12κ2
10Im τ
Z
M d6x ˜g1/2G+
mnpG+g
mnp −
i
4κ2
10Im τ
Z
M G(3) ∧G(3)
= −V −
i
4κ2
10Im τ
Z
M G(3) ∧G(3)
(A.14)
where we deﬁne the potential
V = −
1
2κ2
10Im τ
Z
M G+
(3) ∧∗6G+
(3)
(A.15)
The second term in (A.14) is proportional to µ3QG
3 , where µ3 is the D3 tension and QG
3 is
the D3 charge carried by the three-form ﬂux. This term is topological and does not involve
the moduli. It is canceled by the tension of the localized sources, because these have total
D3 charge Qloc
3
= −QG
3 and saturate the inequality (2.26).
30

PAGE 31
(A.5) implies that V only depends on the coeﬃcients of Ωand χα when G(3) is expanded
in the basis of 3-forms. In terms of the metric (A.6), we ﬁnd
V =
i
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω+ Gα¯β
Z
M G(3) ∧χα
Z
M G(3) ∧χβ
2Im τ κ2
10
Z
M Ω∧Ω
.
(A.16)
This can be derived from a superpotential of the form discussed in refs. [8, 47, 9],
W =
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω.
(A.17)
Indeed, from (A.7,A.4) we ﬁnd
DαW ≡∂αW + (∂αK)W =
Z
M G(3) ∧χα ,
DτW ≡∂τW + (∂τK)W =
1
¯τ −τ
Z
M G(3) ∧Ω,
(A.18)
where K = K1 + K2. After a Weyl transformation to the four-dimensional Einstein frame,
the potential takes the standard N = 1 supergravity form [48], as in eq. (2.43).
This potential has been discussed before [49], but in somewhat diﬀerent contexts. In
the ﬁrst place, these earlier systems had N = 2 low energy supersymmetry, even when
the potential was written in N = 1 form.
Here, the orientifolding or the F-theory D7
conﬁguration explicitly reduces the low energy supersymmetry to N = 1. Second, objects
with negative D3 charge were not included, so the ﬂuxes were restricted to
R
M H(3)∧F(3) = 0.
The conditions DαW = DτW = 0 imply that G+
(3) = 0.
Thus the eﬀective four-
dimensional action reproduces the ten-dimensional conditions (2.31) for a solution. Unbroken
supersymmetry requires also that DρW = 0, implying that the (0, 3) part of G(3) vanishes
and so this ﬂux is (2, 1) and primitive, again as argued directly in ten dimensions. The latter
condition is equivalent to W = 0; this will generically not hold when DαW = DτW = 0.
The F-theory generalization of this discussion readily follows, with superpotential [8]
W =
Z
X G(4) ∧Ω4 ,
(A.19)
where G(4) is the F-theory lift of the ﬂux, locally given in eq. (2.42).
This dimensional reduction has been carried out in a limit that is rather orthogonal to
the main concerns of this paper, in that the warp factor is constant rather than strongly
varying, and ˜F(5) = 0. The detailed treatment of dimensional reduction in the warped case
is left for the future (see also ref. [40]), but in the present case we can argue that the key
31

PAGE 32
results are unaﬀected. In particular, the ten-dimensional analysis of section 2 shows that
the solutions found from the eﬀective action derived here remain solutions even when the
warping is taken into account. The physical reason is that all localized sources as well as the
supergravity ﬁelds couple to the warp factor and the 5-form ﬂux in the same ratio, so that
there is no net force.
The superpotential derived in the large-radius limit is exact in string perturbation theory.
This is because the real part of ρ is an axion, obtained from the tensor ﬁeld (A.1), and so
there is a Peccei-Quinn symmetry broken only by D-instanton eﬀects. Thus ρ cannot appear
in the superpotential [50]; the same will be true of all other K¨ahler moduli. Note that this
is not true of τ. The ﬁeld C(0) appears in the classical action through the deﬁnition of G(3),
so there is no PQ symmetry and τ does enter into the classical superpotential (A.17).
32

PAGE 33
References
[1] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “A large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370 (1999) [hep-th/9905221].
[2] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “An alternative to compactiﬁcation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
4690 (1999) [hep-th/9906064].
[3] S. B. Giddings and E. Katz, “Eﬀective theories and black hole production in warped
compactiﬁcations,” hep-th/0009176, to appear in Jour. Math. Phys.
[4] H.Verlinde, “Holography and Compactiﬁcation,” Nucl. Phys. B580, 264 (2000) [hep-
th/9906182].
[5] J. Maldacena, “The large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998) [hep-th/9711200].
[6] W. D. Goldberger and M. B. Wise, “Modulus stabilization with bulk ﬁelds,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 83, 4922 (1999) [hep-ph/9907447]; Phys. Lett. B475, 275 (2000) [hep-
ph/9911457].
[7] I. R. Klebanov and M. J. Strassler, “Supergravity and a conﬁning gauge theory: dual-
ity cascades and χsb-resolution of naked singularities,” JHEP 0008, 052 (2000) [hep-
th/0007191].
[8] S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten, “CFT’s from Calabi-Yau four-folds,” Nucl. Phys.
B584, 69 (2000) [hep-th/9906070].
[9] C. Vafa, “Superstrings and topological strings at large N,” hep-th/0008142.
[10] S. Kachru and E. Silverstein, “4d conformal ﬁeld theories and strings on orbifolds,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4855 (1998) [hep-th/9802183].
[11] A. Kehagias, “New type IIB vacua and their F-theory interpretation,” Phys. Lett. B435,
337 (1998) [hep-th/9805131].
[12] I. R. Klebanov and E. Witten, “Superconformal ﬁeld theory on threebranes at a Calabi-
Yau singularity,” Nucl. Phys. B536, 199 (1998) [hep-th/9807080].
[13] B. S. Acharya, J. M. Figueroa-O’Farrill, C. M. Hull and B. Spence, “Branes at con-
ical singularities and holography,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 1249 (1999) [hep-
th/9808014];
D. R. Morrison and M. R. Plesser, “Non-spherical horizons, I” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
3, 1 (1999) [hep-th/9810201].
[14] P. Candelas and X. de la Ossa, “Comments on conifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B342, 246 (1990).
33

PAGE 34
[15] S. S. Gubser and I. R. Klebanov, “Baryons and domain walls in an N = 1 superconformal
gauge theory,” Phys. Rev. D58, 125025 (1998) [hep-th/9808075].
[16] I. R. Klebanov and N. A. Nekrasov, “Gravity duals of fractional branes and logarithmic
RG ﬂow,” Nucl. Phys. B574, 263 (2000) [hep-th/9911096].
[17] I. R. Klebanov and A. A. Tseytlin, “Gravity duals of supersymmetric SU(N) x SU(N+M)
gauge theories,” Nucl. Phys. B578, 123 (2000) [hep-th/0002159].
[18] P. Mayr, “On supersymmetry breaking in string theory and its realization in brane
worlds,” Nucl. Phys. B 593, 99 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0003198].
[19] E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas and D. V. Nanopoulos, “Naturally vanishing cos-
mological constant in N=1 supergravity,” Phys. Lett. B133, 61 (1983);
J. Ellis, A. B. Lahanas, D. V. Nanopoulos and K. Tamvakis, “No - Scale Supersymmetric
Standard Model,” Phys. Lett. B134, 429 (1984).
[20] S.B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski, work in progress.
[21] E. Witten, “Dimensional reduction of superstring models,” Phys. Lett. B155, 151
(1985).
[22] M. Dine, R. Rohm, N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Gluino condensation in superstring
models,” Phys. Lett. B156, 55 (1985).
[23] B. de Wit, D.J. Smit and N.D. Hari Dass, “Residual supersymmetry of compactiﬁed D
= 10 supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B283, 165 (1987).
[24] J. Maldacena and C. Nunez, “Supergravity description of ﬁeld theories on curved man-
ifolds and a no go theorem,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 16, 822 (2001) [hep-th/0007018].
[25] J. Polchinski, String Theory, 2 vols., Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[26] M. Bershadsky, C. Vafa and V. Sadov, “D-Branes and Topological Field Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B 463, 420 (1996) [hep-th/9511222].
[27] K. Dasgupta, D. P. Jatkar and S. Mukhi, “Gravitational couplings and Z(2) orien-
tifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B523, 465 (1998) [hep-th/9707224];
C. P. Bachas, P. Bain and M. B. Green, “Curvature terms in D-brane actions and their
M-theory origin,” JHEP 9905, 011 (1999) [hep-th/9903210];
A. Fotopoulos, “On (alpha’)**2 corrections to the D-brane action for non-geodesic
world-volume embeddings,” JHEP 0109, 005 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0104146].
[28] Y. E. Cheung and Z. Yin, “Anomalies, branes, and currents,” Nucl. Phys. B517, 69
(1998) [hep-th/9710206];
R. Minasian and G. Moore, “K-theory and Ramond-Ramond charge,” JHEP 9711, 002
(1997) [hep-th/9710230].
34

PAGE 35
[29] M. Grana and J. Polchinski, “Supersymmetric three-form ﬂux perturbations on AdS5”
Phys. Rev. D63, 026001 (2001) [hep-th/0009211].
[30] S. S. Gubser, “Supersymmetry and F-theory realization of the deformed conifold with
three-form ﬂux,” [hep-th/0010010].
[31] M. Grana and J. Polchinski, in preparation.
[32] J. Schwarz and P. West, “Symmetries and transformations of chiral N=2 D = 10 super-
gravity,” Phys. Lett. B126, 301 (1983);
J. Schwarz, “Covariant ﬁeld equations of chiral N=2 D = 10 supergravity,” Nucl. Phys.
B226, 269 (1983);
P. Howe and P. West, “The complete N=2, D = 10 supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B238,
181 (1984).
[33] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, “M theory, orientifolds and G-ﬂux,” JHEP 9908,
023 (1999) [hep-th/9908088].
[34] K. Becker and M. Becker, “M-theory on eight-manifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 155
[hep-th/9605053].
[35] P. Candelas and X. de la Ossa, “Moduli Space of Calabi-Yau Manifolds,” Nucl. Phys.
B355, 455 (1991).
[36] C. S. Chan, P. L. Paul and H. Verlinde, “A note on warped string compactiﬁcation,”
Nucl. Phys. B581, 156 (2000) [hep-th/0003236].
[37] A. Strominger, “Massless black holes and conifolds in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B451,
96 (1995) [hep-th/9504090].
[38] J. Polchinski and M. Strassler, “String dual of a conﬁning four-dimensional gauge the-
ory,” hep-th/0003136.
[39] T. Banks, L. Dixon, D. Friedan and E. Martinec, “Phenomenology and Conformal Field
Theory, or Can String Theory Predict the Weak Mixing Angle?,” Nucl. Phys. B299,
613 (1988).
[40] B. Greene, K. Schalm and G. Shiu, “Warped compactiﬁcations in M and F theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B584, 480 (2000) [hep-th/0004103].
[41] A. Sen, “Orientifold limit of F-theory vacua,” Phys. Rev. D55, 7345 (1997) [hep-
th/9702165].
[42] S. Sethi, C. Vafa and E. Witten, “Constraints on low-dimensional string compactiﬁca-
tions,” Nucl. Phys. B480, 213 (1996) [hep-th/9606122].
35

PAGE 36
[43] D. Morrison and C. Vafa, “Compactiﬁcations of F-theory on Calabi–Yau threefolds –
I,” Nucl. Phys. B473, 74 (1996) [hep-th/9602114]; Nucl. Phys. B476, 437 (1996).
[44] P. Aspinwall and M. Gross, “The SO(32) heterotic string on a K3 surface,” Phys. Lett.
B387, 735 (1996) [hep-th/9605131].
[45] M. Bershadsky, K. Intriligator, S. Kachru, D. Morrison, V. Sadov and C. Vafa, “Ge-
ometric singularities and enhanced gauge symmetries,” Nucl. Phys. B481, 215 (1996)
[hep-th/9605200].
[46] S. Dimopoulos, S. Kachru, N. Kaloper, A. Lawrence and E. Silverstein, “Small Numbers
From Tunneling Between Brane Throats,” hep-th/0104239.
[47] T. R. Taylor and C. Vafa, “RR ﬂux on Calabi-Yau and partial supersymmetry breaking,”
Phys. Lett. B474, 130 (2000) [hep-th/9912152].
[48] E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello and A. Van Proeyen, “Yang-Mills theories with
local supersymmetry: Lagrangian, transformation laws and superhiggs eﬀect,” Nucl.
Phys. B212, 413 (1983).
[49] J. Michelson, “Compactiﬁcations of type IIB strings to four dimensions with non-trivial
classical potential,” Nucl. Phys. B495, 127 (1997) [hep-th/9610151];
G. Curio, A. Klemm, D. Lust and S. Theisen, “On the vacuum structure of type II
string compactiﬁcations on Calabi-Yau spaces with H-ﬂuxes,” hep-th/0012213.
[50] E. Witten, “New Issues in manifolds of SU(3) holonomy,” Nucl. Phys. B268, 79 (1986).
36
