PAGE 1
arXiv:hep-th/9609122v2  18 Oct 1996
hep-th/9609122, IASSNS-HEP-96/96
ON FLUX QUANTIZATION IN M-THEORY
AND THE EFFECTIVE ACTION
Edward Witten1
School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study
Olden Lane, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
The quantization law for the antisymmetric tensor ﬁeld of M-theory contains a grav-
itational contribution not known previously. When it is included, the low energy eﬀective
action of M-theory, including one-loop and Chern-Simons contributions, is well-deﬁned.
The relation of M-theory to the E8 × E8 heterotic string greatly facilitates the analysis.
September, 1996
1 Research supported in part by NSF Grant PHY-9513835.

PAGE 2
1. Introduction
This paper is devoted to explaining some topological points concerning eleven-
dimensional M-theory. Roughly speaking, we will explain one new physical eﬀect and
show how it enters in re-interpreting, or avoiding, several potential anomalies.
The new physical eﬀect involves the three-form C of eleven-dimensional supergravity
and its ﬁeld strength G = dC. It has been believed that G is constrained precisely by a
ﬂux quantization law, which says that if G is correctly normalized its periods are integer
multiples of 2π. As we will see, this is not quite correct.
For the precise statement, recall ﬁrst that in M-theory we can assume that the space-
time manifold Y is a spin manifold since spinors exist in the theory.2 For Y a spin manifold,
the ﬁrst Pontryagin class p1(Y ) is divisible by two in a canonical way. We set
λ(Y ) = p1(Y )
2
.
(1.1)
λ in turn may or may not be divisible by two, depending on the topology of Y .
It turns out that the object that must have integral periods is not G/2π but G/2π −
λ/2. We denote the cohomology class of G/2π as [G/2π] and we describe the situation by
saying that
 G
2π

−λ
2 ∈H4(Y, Z).
(1.2)
(A perhaps more precise way to say this is that it is not [G/2π] but [G/π] that is well
deﬁned as an integral cohomology class, and that this class is congruent to λ modulo
2.) This shift from the naive quantization law is obtained in section two by a very brief
argument using the relation of M-theory to the E8 × E8 heterotic string [1]. We also give
a second (and perhaps more precise) derivation of the shift using membrane world-volume
anomalies. The rest of the paper is devoted to applications of this eﬀect, beginning at the
end of section two with an application to M-theory on (S1)5/Z2.
In section three, we reconsider an eﬀect noted recently in compactiﬁcation of M-
theory to three dimensions [2]. It was shown that standard M-theory compactiﬁcation on
Y = R3 × X, with X an eight-manifold, is consistent only if X obeys a certain topological
2 In this paper, we generally assume that Y is orientable, although, as M-theory conserves
parity (this is one of the points we will re-examine), one could relax this. If Y is unorientable,
it should carry a “pin” structure rather than a spin structure. We do consider an unorientable
example at the end of section two.
1

PAGE 3
condition. We will see that this condition follows from (1.2). (1.2) implies that G can
be zero only if λ(X) is divisible by two (in the integral cohomology of X). In [2] (as in
most discussions of compactiﬁcation), G was set to zero. An inconsistency therefore arises
unless λ(X)/2 is integral. As we will show in section three, when λ(X)/2 is integral, the
anomaly found in [2] vanishes.
What to do when λ(X)/2 is not integral is now clear. One must endow X with a
suitable non-zero G with half-integral periods of G/2π. Compactiﬁcations with non-zero
G have not been much studied, but in the case of compactiﬁcation on a Calabi-Yau four-
fold, there is a very elegant framework [3] for incorporating G in a fashion that preserves
supersymmetry. (See also [4] for an older example of a diﬀerent sort.) Of course, one can
turn on (integral) G even if λ/2 is integral, but when λ/2 is non-integral, one must take
G non-zero.
Integrality of λ/2 has an attractive interpretation that enters the argument of section
three: it is equivalent to evenness of the intersection form on H4(X, Z).
In section four, we move on to a question of which the discussion in section three is
really a special case: deﬁning the Chern-Simons interactions of the low energy limit of
M-theory. Thus, the quantization of G means that the C ∧G ∧G interaction of eleven-
dimensional supergravity is a kind of Chern-Simons coupling. One may wonder whether,
given the value of the quantum of G, this coupling is correctly normalized so as to be
single-valued modulo 2π. The answer is “no”; it is too small by a factor of six. To make
sense of the Chern-Simons interaction requires two ingredients: gravitational corrections
to the CGG coupling; and some congruences.
The gravitational corrections come from two sources: a term ﬁrst computed in [5]
and further studied in [6]; and the λ/2 term in (1.2).
The necessary congruences are
potentially baﬄing – unless one knows the relation of M-theory to the E8 × E8 heterotic
string, which gives them naturally. Putting everything together, we show that the Chern-
Simons couplings are completely well-deﬁned modulo a term that is independent of G.
Section ﬁve is devoted to the G-independent term, which turns out to be essential in re-
solving a longstanding though perhaps relatively little-known puzzle. In 8k+3 dimensions,
Dirac-like operators have eigenvalues which are real but not necessarily positive. There is
sometimes [7] (see
[8-11] for more detail) a Z2 anomaly aﬀecting the sign of a Dirac
determinant. A case in point is the Rarita-Schwinger operator D of eleven-dimensional
supergravity. It has inﬁnitely many positive and negative eigenvalues, raising the question
2

PAGE 4
of whether the sign of the fermion path integral can be consistently deﬁned. In uncom-
pactiﬁed eleven-dimensional Minkowski space M 11, there is no problem; this follows from
the absence of exotic twelve-spheres, which implies that the diﬀeomorphism group of M 11
is connected, so that there is no “room” for an anomaly. It has not been clear under what
circumstances the sign of the Rarita-Schwinger determinant can be consistently deﬁned
after compactiﬁcation.
In ﬁeld theory, when there is such a Z2 anomaly, it can generally be canceled by
including a Chern-Simons coupling kLC.S., where LC.S. is a suitable Chern-Simons coupling
that is well-deﬁned modulo 2π, and k is a half-integer (congruent to 1/2 modulo Z), so
that eikLC.S. has a sign problem that just cancels the anomaly of det D. The choice of a
non-zero k, however, violates parity, so this eﬀect is often described as a “parity anomaly.”
This has led to speculations that eleven-dimensional supergravity or M-theory might have
a parity anomaly, but this would rule out its relation [1] to the E8 × E8 heterotic string,
which depends on dividing by an involution that reverses the parity. A parity anomaly
of M-theory would also have strange implications for other duality statements in string
theory, as orientation-reversing transformations in M-theory are often mapped to known
symmetries of string theories.
In section ﬁve, we resolve these questions.
Let IM = CGG + gravitational terms
be the Chern-Simons couplings in the low energy limit of M-theory. The G-dependence
of eiIM is well-deﬁned, according to our results in section four. However, eiIM has a G-
independent sign ambiguity, which just equals that of the Rarita-Schwinger determinant
det D, so that eiIM · det D is well-deﬁned. Since the other massless ﬁelds of M-theory are
bosons with manifestly well-deﬁned determinants, this completes the demonstration that
the low energy eﬀective action of M-theory is well-deﬁned.
Despite this crucial role of the Chern-Simons terms, there is no parity violation. The
Chern-Simons coupling that cancels the potential anomaly of the Rarita-Schwinger ﬁeld is
completely parity-invariant, with C and G understood (as usual) to be odd under parity.
Roughly speaking, G plays the role that is usually played by the Chern-Simons coupling
k in corresponding 8k + 3-dimensional gauge theories. When λ is not divisible by two,
one must choose a non-zero G, with half-integral G/2π (just as in the ﬁeld theory one
chooses a non-zero and half-integral k), and this violates parity. But because G is a ﬁeld
(while the usual k is a coupling constant) what one has in M-theory is spontaneous parity
violation by the choice of a particular physical state, rather than explicit parity violation
of the theory. Notice that, even though G and λ transform oppositely under parity, the
relation (1.2) is completely parity-invariant; in fact, as λ is integral, it is equivalent to say
that G/2π −λ/2 is integral or that G/2π + λ/2 is integral.
3

PAGE 5
2. Flux Quantization
2.1. The Boundary Of The Universe
The shifted quantization condition on G that was described in the introduction is
easily motivated given the relation [1] of M-theory to the E8 × E8 heterotic string.
Suppose that the space-time manifold Y has a boundary N. Then, according to [1],
there are E8 gauge ﬁelds propagating on N.
An E8 bundle V has a four-dimensional
characteristic class w(V ) which is associated with the diﬀerential form trF ∧F/16π2. The
topology of E8 is such that w(V ) is subject to absolutely no restriction except for being
integral. The characteristic class λ = p1/2 of the tangent bundle of Y is associated with
the diﬀerential form trR ∧R/16π2. In the second paper in [1], it was determined that the
boundary values of G are restricted by
G
2π

N
=
1
16π2

trF ∧F −1
2trR ∧R

.
(2.1)
At the level of cohomology, this implies that
 G
2π

N
= w(V ) −λ
2
(2.2)
and therefore, since w(V ) is integral, that [G/2π] −λ/2 is integral when restricted to N.
So the promised relation (1.2) holds, at least when restricted to N.
Now consider a physicist who is integrating G/2π −λ/2 over a four-cycle S in space-
time. If anywhere in the universe – maybe 1010 light years away – there is a boundary
N that contains a four-cycle S′ homologous to S, then from what has just been said, the
integral over S of G/2π −λ/2 must be integral. If
R
S(G/2π −λ/2) were to be non-integral,
the physicist measuring it would obtain the amazing information that no N and S′ exist,
at any distance from S, no matter how great. The ability to obtain such information about
what there is at arbitrarily big distances from the observer seems counterintuitive, so it is
natural to suspect that the right requirement is that
R
S(G/2π −λ/2) is integral whether
N and S′ exist or not, or in other words (since this is true for all S) that the cohomology
class [G/2π] −λ/2 is integral. In the rest of this paper it will, hopefully, become clear that
that is the right interpretation.
For some additional insight, note that, since the homotopy groups πi(E8) vanish for
i < 15, except for π3, and since dim N < 16, there is no restriction on the characteristic
class w(V ) except integrality, and the E8 bundle V over N is completely determined
4

PAGE 6
(topologically) by w(V ). The ﬁrst statement means that (2.2) imposes no restriction on G
except integrality of the restriction to N of [G/2π] −λ/2; this is the basis for an assertion
made above. The second statement means that, since [G/2π] and λ are determined by their
restrictions to the interior of space-time, a physicist who has made thorough measurements
of the physics away from the boundary of space-time can uniquely predict what the E8
bundle will have to be on the boundary.
2.2. Membrane Anomalies
Now we will oﬀer a second and I believe conclusive approach to the same result, based
on considering world-volume anomalies of M-theory membranes. There is no need here to
assume that M-theory has “elementary” membranes, whatever those may be. It is only
necessary that M-theory admits macroscopic membranes. Given this, the path integral in
the presence of the membrane must be well-deﬁned; this is the issue that we will examine.
Rather than aiming for generality, I will formulate the argument in a representative
situation.
Suppose the eleven-manifold Y contains a submanifold D = S3 × S1.
We
consider a membrane whose world-volume T is wrapped over S3 × q, where q is a point in
S1. We want to determine whether the membrane path integral is single-valued when q
moves all the way around the S1.
There are two potentially dangerous factors to consider. One is the “Chern-Simons”
factor coming from the coupling of the membrane world-volume to C. This factor gives in
the membrane path integrand a factor
exp(i
Z
T
C).
(2.3)
The change in this factor when q moves once around S1 is
exp(i
Z
D
G).
(2.4)
This factor is 1 if and only if the period of G is a multiple of 2π.
The second dangerous factor is the path integral over the world-volume fermions on
T. At this point, therefore, we need some remarks on fermion path integrals. The path
integral in 8k + 3 dimensions for massless fermions coupled to gauge ﬁelds and gravity is
naturally real, but can be positive or negative. Potentially, as in [7-11], there can be an
inconsistency in deﬁning the sign of the fermion path integral. This will happen in our
problem under some conditions on the embedding of D in Y .
5

PAGE 7
In fact, the fermions on the membrane world-volume T are sections of the spin bundle
of T tensored with the normal bundle N to T in space-time. One has N = O⊕N ′, where O
– a one-dimensional trivial bundle – is the direction tangent to the S1 factor in D, and N ′
is the normal bundle to D in space-time. N ′ can be absolutely any Spin(7) bundle. Such a
bundle has a four-dimensional characteristic class λ(N ′) (equal to p1(N ′)/2). λ(N ′) is equal
to the restriction of λ(Y ) to D (as the tangent bundle to D has vanishing characteristic
classes). The considerations of [7-11] show that as q moves once around the S1, the sign
of the fermion path integral changes by a factor of (−1)
R
D λ. What must be single-valued
is therefore not really (2.4) but
(−1)
R
D λ exp(i
Z
D
G).
(2.5)
But this amounts to our main claim: G/2π has a half-integral period on just those cycles
on which the value of λ is odd.
The fact that this computation gives the same result as the argument based on bound-
aries of space-time and E8 × E8 gauge ﬁelds is a satisfying test of quantum M-theory.
2.3. Application To An Orbifold
From what we have seen, it will sometimes happens that a half-integral quantum of
G/2π will be trapped on a four-cycle D in space-time. This is reminiscent of an example
already considered in the literature, where in M-theory on R5/Z2, a half-integral ﬂux of
G appeared [12]. To be precise, if D is a four-cycle surrounding the origin in R5/Z2 –
so D can naturally be taken to be a copy of S4/Z2 = RP4 – then it was found from
considerations of space-time anomaly cancellation that
R
D(G/2π) = 1/2 modulo Z.
To put this in the present context, we should ﬁrst delete a neighborhood of the origin
in R5/Z2 – as ﬁeld theory considerations may not be applicable near the singularity. Let
eR5/Z2 be R5/Z2 with such a neighborhood omitted. Now, eR5/Z2 is not orientable –
this is the only place in the present paper where we consider an unorientable space-time.
The diﬀerential form λ can be taken to vanish for eR5/Z2 – as that manifold admits a ﬂat
metric. So any statement we make will have to involve torsion.
In any event, for unorientable manifolds, it is unnatural to state a relation between G
and λ, as the two transform oppositely under reversal of orientation (being respectively odd
and even). Note, though,3 that in the orientable case, λ is congruent modulo two to the
3 The following formulation was improved by suggestions by D. Freed.
6

PAGE 8
Stieﬀel-Whitney class w4, so that our statement in the orientable case could equivalently
have been
Z
D
G
2π = 1
2
Z
D
w4 modulo Z.
(2.6)
This is a way of expressing our result in the orientable case that may carry over better
to the unorientable case. Indeed, if as above D is a copy of RP4 wrapping around the
“interior” of eR5/Z2, then a standard computation 4 shows that
Z
D
w4 = 1 modulo 2.
(2.7)
(Of course, as Stieﬀel-Whitney classes are mod two classes, the integral only makes sense
modulo two.)
Therefore, the result of [12] that an R5/Z2 singularity is the source of
a half-integral ﬂux of G/2π is actually a consequence of (2.6).
If one considers other
somewhat analogous Z2 orbifold singularities studied in M-theory, such as R8/Z2 and
R9/Z2 considered in [13], a computation as in the footnote shows that w4 = 0, so that no
half-integral G ﬂux is expected - or found.
3. Integrality Of The Number Of Branes
In [2], compactiﬁcation of M-theory on an eight-manifold X was considered. It was
tacitly assumed that the vacuum expectation value of G was zero.
The eﬀects of the
interaction [5,6] C ∧I8(R) (where I8(R) is a certain quartic polynomial in the curvature
tensor) were considered. If J = −
R
X I8(R) is non-zero, one obtains a “tadpole” for the C
ﬁeld, which must be canceled by including in the vacuum J two-branes. Since the number
of two-branes must be an integer, the theory is inconsistent unless J is integral.
It was pointed out in [2] that for X a Calabi-Yau four-fold, J = c4/24 (or equivalently
J = χ(X)/24, with χ the topological Euler characteristic). Index theorems were used to
show that c4 is always divisible by six, but explicit examples show that c4 need not be
divisible by 12 or 24, so that one gets a non-trivial restriction on these compactiﬁcations.
4 The tangent bundle of eR5/Z2 is a sum of ﬁve copies of an unorientable real line bundle ǫ.
If x = w1(ǫ), then the total Stieﬀel-Whitney class of eR5/Z2 is (1 + x)5 = 1 + x + x4 + x5. In
particular, w4(eR5/Z2) = x4. Now restrict this to a copy of D = RP4 ⊂eR5/Z2. The mod two
cohomology of RP4 is the polynomial ring in x with relation x5 = 0, and in particular x4 is the
mod two fundamental class of RP4, which integrates to one (modulo two).
7

PAGE 9
For a more general eight-manifold, the formula for J, if written in terms of λ = p1/2
and p2, is
J = p2 −λ2
48
.
(3.1)
Now let us assess the integrality of J, using index theorems together with our previous
considerations. The index of the Dirac operator on X, written in terms of λ and p2, is
I =
1
1440
 7λ2 −p2

.
(3.2)
Since I is an integer, it follows that
p2 −λ2 ∼= 6λ2 modulo 1440.
(3.3)
Now, if G is to vanish, then according to our shifted ﬂux condition, λ must be divisible
by two, say λ = 2x with x an integral class. So we can write
p2 −λ2 ∼= 24x2 modulo 1440.
(3.4)
So p2 −λ2 is divisible by 24. Since we need divisibility by 48, we must probe more deeply.
An extra factor of two arises as follows. Let x be any element of H4(X, Z). Then by
a special case of the Wu formula,
x2 ∼= x · λ modulo 2.
(3.5)
If, therefore, λ is divisible by two, then x2 is even, and (3.4) implies that (p2 −λ2)/48 is
integral, showing that the number of branes is integral, as promised. Note that formula
(3.5) implies that the intersection form on H4(X, Z) is even when λ is divisible by two.
Since this intersection form is in any case unimodular (by Poincar´e duality), this gives
another occurrence of even unimodular lattices in string theory.
The formula (3.5) can be put in the following theoretical context. Let x and y be
elements of H4(X, Z). Because (x + y)2 is congruent to x2 + y2 modulo two, the function
f(x) = x2 is a linear function of x modulo two. By Poincar´e duality, there is therefore an
element α ∈H4(X, Z2) such that for all x ∈H4(X, Z2), x2 ∼= x · α modulo 2. α is called
the Wu class and in general can be written as a polynomial in Stiefel-Whitney classes. For
X a spin manifold, so that wi = 0 for i < 4, one has simply α = w4, and this in turn equals
the mod two reduction of the class λ = p1/2 ∈H4(X, Z), leading to (3.5). We will not
8

PAGE 10
attempt here an account of these matters, but instead give a direct proof of (3.5), using
E8 index theory, in the next section.
In a similar way, because the function f(x) = x3 is linear in x modulo 3 (that is,
(x + y)3 ∼= x3 + y3 modulo three), it is natural, if x is for example a four-dimensional class
in a twelve-dimensional spin manifold W, to have a formula x3 ∼= x · β modulo 3, with
β some eight-dimensional class. In the next section, we will explain how the existence of
such a formula is relevant to M-theory, and we will determine β using E8 index theory.
The computation we did in this section was really a special case of the general question
of whether the Chern-Simons couplings – the classical CGG coupling and the quantum
correction CI8(R) – are single-valued. Indeed, non-integrality of the tadpole would mean
that the CI8(R) coupling is not well-deﬁned modulo 2π upon adding to C a closed form
with properly normalized periods. In the rest of this paper, we study more systematically
the well-deﬁnedness of the Chern-Simons couplings.
4. The Chern-Simons Couplings
Since G can have non-zero periods, the deﬁnition G = dC is not really valid globally,
and C is not well-deﬁned as a diﬀerential form. There is therefore some subtlety in deﬁning
the classical Chern-Simons interaction I =
R
Y C ∧G ∧G. This is most naturally accom-
plished by realizing Y as the boundary of a twelve-dimensional spin manifold Z, extending
the closed four-form G over Z, 5 and setting I =
R
Z G ∧G ∧G. To check whether this is
well-deﬁned – that is, independent of the choice of Z and of the extension of G – one takes
two diﬀerent choices, involving twelve-manifolds Z and Z′, each with boundary Y , and one
tries to show that the corresponding I’s – call them IZ and IZ′ – are equal modulo 2π. If
Q is the closed twelve manifold obtained by gluing Z′ to Z along their common boundary
(one takes Z′ and Z with “opposite” orientations so that the orientations ﬁt together to
an orientation of Q), then
IZ −IZ′ =
Z
Q
G ∧G ∧G.
(4.1)
5 The existence of a twelve-dimensional spin manifold Z over which G extends is ensured by
a computation by Stong [14]. For later purposes, we want to choose the extension of G to obey
the shifted quantization condition. Z can be chosen to make this possible. For instance, the
shifted quantization condition says that [G/π] = λ + 2α where α is some integral class. λ, being
a characteristic class, automatically extends over Z, and Stong’s theorem means that Z can be
chosen so that α extends; one can then take G/π = λ + 2α as the deﬁnition of the extension of G.
9

PAGE 11
For the Chern-Simons interaction to be well-deﬁned modulo 2π is thus equivalent to the
requirement that for a closed spin manifold Q, IQ =
R
Q G ∧G ∧G is a multiple of 2π.
One might expect that the quantization law of G would be such as to ensure this, but
in fact it is not. The actual relation is that, if α is the cohomology class of [G/2π], then
IQ
2π = −1
6
Z
Q
α3.
(4.2)
We will see below where this crucial factor of −1/6 comes from in terms of the relation of
M-theory to the heterotic string. It can also be veriﬁed using a recent careful analysis of
numerical factors in M-theory [15].
Since 1/6 = 1/2 −1/3, in analyzing integrality of the right hand side of (4.2), mod
2 and mod 3 congruences are helpful. The mod 2 congruences one needs are generaliza-
tions of (3.5), and the mod 3 congruences are possible for a reason suggested toward the
end of section three. In addition to certain congruences, restoring integrality depends on
gravitational corrections to the CGG coupling, which are of two kinds. (1) It is not α, but
α −λ/2, that is integral. (2) One must also include the CI8(R) quantum correction.
Including the gravitational corrections and working out all of the congruences that
are relevant in understanding the integrality of IQ/2π would be extremely complicated in
the absence of some insight about the structure that is appearing here. But the analysis
is actually made extremely easy by the recognition in [1] that the Chern-Simons couplings
in eleven dimensions are related to anomalies in E8 supergravity in ten dimensions. They
are therefore also related to index theory in twelve dimensions. To be more exact, the
eleven-dimensional Chern-Simons couplings were related in [1] to the anomalies of gluinos
of one E8 gauge group (rather than E8 × E8) plus half of the anomaly of the dilatino and
gravitino. Moreover, the gluinos, gravitino, and dilatino are all Majorana-Weyl, so their
anomalies are half of what one would have for “ordinary” Weyl fermions.
Introduce on the twelve-manifold Q an E8 bundle V whose characteristic class w(V )
obeys w = α + λ/2. (V exists and is unique as explained at the end of section 2.1.) The
shifted ﬂux condition permits w to be an arbitrary four-dimensional class. Let i(E8) be
the index of the Dirac operator on Q for fermions with values in V (taken in the adjoint
representation of E8), and let i(R.S.) be the index of the Rarita-Schwinger operator on
Q. The analysis of the Chern-Simons terms in section 3.1 of [1], as subsequently extended
[15,16], is equivalent to the assertion that after including the gravitational corrections
IQ
2π = i(E8)
2
+ i(R.S.)
4
.
(4.3)
10

PAGE 12
Here i(E8) appears with a factor of 1/2 because of the Majorana-Weyl condition, while
i(R.S.) has a factor of 1/4 because of the Majorana-Weyl condition plus the fact that we
want the characteristic class that is related to 1/2 of the gravitino-dilatino anomaly.
Now, in 8k + 4 dimensions, because of charge conjugation symmetry, the index of the
Dirac operator with values in a real vector bundle is even. So i(E8)/2 is an integer, but
i(R.S.)/4 is in general a half-integer. Since the G or w dependence of IQ/2π is entirely in
i(E8) (the other term is not sensitive to the choice of E8 bundle!), IQ/2π changes by an
integer under any change of G or w. Thus, we have veriﬁed integrality of IQ/2π up to a
term that is G-independent. Moreover, in general (4.3) makes it clear that IQ/2π takes
values in Z/2, with integrality depending only on the value of i(R.S.) modulo four. In the
next section, we will interpret the meaning of this last, G-independent, potential failure of
integrality.
To exhibit the congruences that are implicit here, and also to make clear just how
much trouble one might have had with this analysis if one did not know the relation of
M-theory to E8 gauge theory, we will now expand (4.3) explicitly using the index theorem
(or equivalently, the detailed knowledge of the various Chern-Simons terms) and make
explicit some of the relevant congruences. We get
IQ
2π = −1
6
Z
Q

w −1
2λ
 
(w −1
2λ)2 −1
8(p2 −λ2)

.
(4.4)
(Notice that IQ/2π = −(1/6)
R
Q w3 modulo gravitational corrections; as w equals α modulo
a gravitational correction, this is the basis for the assertion that IQ/2π is as given in (4.2)
modulo gravitational corrections.) Let us see what congruences can be extracted from the
knowledge that the w-dependent terms are integral. First we consider mod 3 congruences.
After expanding out the right hand side of (4.4) and dropping terms that do not have
a 3 in the denominator, the fact that the w-dependent part of IQ/2π is a 3-integer (it can
be written as a rational number with denominator not divisible by three) turns out to be
equivalent to the assertion that
w3 ∼= −(p2 −λ2)w modulo 3.
(4.5)
Such a congruence was promised at the end of section three, and enables one to reexpress
w3/6 (which appears in (4.2)) in terms of w3/2 and a gravitational correction, linear in
w. If (4.5) were known independently, this would be a step in the direction of analyzing
integrality of (4.2) without using E8 gauge theory.
11

PAGE 13
For an interesting mod 2 congruence, take Q = S1×Y , with Y an eleven-manifold, and
take w = dθ ·u+v, where dθ is a closed one-form on S1 that integrates to 1, u ∈H3(Y, Z),
and v ∈H4(Y, Z). Think of IQ/2π as a function of u and v. Since this function changes
by an integer when w is changed, T(u, v) = (IQ(u, v) −IQ(u, 0) −IQ(0, v) + IQ(0, 0))/2π
is an integer. But concretely
T(u, v) = −1
2
Z
Y
 uv2 −uvλ

.
(4.6)
Integrality of this expression for arbitrary u implies that
v2 ∼= vλ modulo 2
(4.7)
for any four-dimensional class v on an eleven-manifold Y . If we specialize to the case that
Y = S3 × X, with X an eight-dimensional spin manifold and v ∈H4(X, Z), then (4.7)
reduces to (3.5), giving the promised proof of (3.5) based on E8 index theory.
For one ﬁnal comment, suppose that λ(Q) is even. Then we can choose an E8 bundle
on Q with w = λ(Q)/2. For such a bundle, IQ is clearly zero according to (4.4). Hence,
using (4.3), iR.S. is divisible by four when λ is even. Since that is not so in general, we go on
in the next section to analyze the signiﬁcance of the fact that IQ/2π may be half-integral.
Note that the formula (4.4) is completely invariant under reversal of orientation of Q
(which changes the sign of the index) together with w →λ −w. Of course w →λ −w
corresponds to G →−G, which customarily accompanies orientation reversal in M-theory.
5.
The Rarita-Schwinger Path Integral
We still must interpret the fact that IQ/2π is half-integral in general. On the other
hand, there is one more potentially anomalous factor in the low energy eﬀective action of
M-theory. This is the determinant of the Rarita-Schwinger operator D. We will see that
the two problems cancel each other.
As we have already noted in section 2.2, in 8k + 3 dimensions a massless fermion
path integral is naturally real. This is essentially because the massless Dirac operator is
hermitean and has real eigenvalues. But (for Majorana fermions) the path integral has no
natural sign, because there is no natural way to ﬁx the sign of the fermion measure.
One way, as in [7], to try to deﬁne the determinant of the Rarita-Schwinger operator
D is to compare det D to the determinant of a massive Rarita-Schwinger operator Dm =
12

PAGE 14
D + im. The constant m is odd under parity, as a result of which det Dm is complex.
Since the mass is a soft perturbation and one can deﬁne det D and det Dm using the same
fermion measure, the ratio det D/ det Dm is completely well-deﬁned. Then by taking the
limit as m →∞, one comes, in a sense, as close as one can to getting a natural deﬁnition of
det D that preserves all the formal properties. However, one gets diﬀerent limits by taking
m →+∞or m →−∞, so that the parity violation which follows from a choice of sign of
m survives as |m| →∞. The limits are in fact essentially (up to a sign that depends only
on the manifold and not on the metric)6
det D exp(±iIR.S./2).
(5.1)
Here the sign of the exponent depends on the sign of m. Also IR.S. is a properly normalized
Chern-Simons functional, associated with the characteristic class i(R.S.)/2. (We recall that
i(R.S.), the Rarita-Schwinger index in 8k + 4 dimensions, is even.) Because of the 1/2
in the exponent, the exponential factor in (5.1) may change sign under some orientation-
preserving diﬀeomorphism, but any such sign changes precisely cancel sign changes in
det D, as one can verify using index theory.
This has led some physicists to suspect over the years that there might be a quantum
correction to the low energy eﬀective action of M-theory of the form iIR.S./2, or perhaps
−iIR.S./2, or some other expression that diﬀers from these by properly normalized Chern-
Simons terms, to cancel the potential sign anomaly of det D. 7 At ﬁrst sight, it seems that
any such functional would violate the parity-invariance of M-theory, even if one allows the
freedom to add terms that depend on G as well as the metric. Parity allows only terms
odd in C and G (namely our friends CGG and CI8(R)); how can these terms, which
vanish at G = 0, help with a problem – the sign of det D – that persists at G = 0?
But the shift in the quantization law of G that we have uncovered makes it just possible
to ﬁnd a parity-invariant Chern-Simons-like interaction whose diﬀerence from IR.S./2 is
properly normalized. The interaction with this property is our friend, the Chern-Simons
interaction of M theory, schematically IM = CGG + CI8(R). This is clear from (4.3):
6
A more precise result in which also this overall manifold-dependent sign is ﬁxed can be
obtained by using the eta invariant instead of Chern-Simons, as in [10,11]. This reﬁnement is not
important in studying M-theory on any given manifold, but would be important in comparing
M-theory on diﬀerent manifolds, for instance in order to analyze gravitational instantons.
7 For example, see a brief comment in [17].
13

PAGE 15
IQ/2π diﬀers from i(R.S.)/4 by an integer, so IM, which is the Chern-Simons coupling
derived from IQ/2π, diﬀers from IR.S./2 by a properly normalized Chern-Simons coupling
(derived from i(E8)/2). The ability to “have our cake and eat it too,” to cancel the sign
ambiguity of det D with a Chern-Simons interaction and still maintain parity conservation,
depends on the fact that, as G must be congruent to λ/2 mod two, one cannot set G to zero
(unless λ is even, in which case, as we saw at the end of section four, i(R.S.) is divisible by
four and the problem vanishes). Related to this, symmetry under reversal of orientation
is rather hidden in (4.3); it acts in the peculiar fashion w →λ −w (which is manifest
when (4.3) is expanded to get (4.4)). Of course that transformation law comes from the
classical parity transformation law G →−G of M-theory, together with the shift in the
ﬂux quantization law of G.
I am grateful to D. Freed and J. Morgan for helpful explanations of some topological
points.
14

PAGE 16
References
[1]
P. Horava and E. Witten, “Heterotic And Type I String Dynamics From Eleven Di-
mensions,” Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 506, hepth/9510209; “Eleven-Dimensional Su-
pergravity On A Manifold With Boundary,” hepth/9603142.
[2]
S. Sethi, C. Vafa, and E. Witten, “Constraints On Low-Dimensional String Compact-
iﬁcations,” hepth/9606122.
[3]
K. Becker and M. Becker, “M-Theory On Eight-Manifolds,” hepth/9605053.
[4]
M. J. Duﬀ, B. E. W. Nilsson, and C. N. Pope, “Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking
By The Squashed Seven Sphere,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 (1983) 2043.
[5]
C. Vafa and E. Witten, “A One-Loop Test Of String Duality,” Nucl. Phys. B447
(1995), hep-th/9505053.
[6]
M. J. Duﬀ, J. T. Liu, and R. Minasian, “Eleven-Dimensional Origin Of String/String
Duality: A One Loop Test,” hepth/9506126.
[7]
L. Alvarez-Gaum´e and E. Witten, “Gravitational Anomalies,” Nucl. Phys. B234
(1983) 269; see p. 309.
[8]
A. N. Redlich, “Gauge Non-Invariance And Parity Nonconservation Of Three-
Dimensional Fermions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 18.
[9]
A. J. Niemi and G. W. Semenoﬀ, “Axial-Anomaly-Induced Fermion Fractionalization
And Eﬀective Gauge Theory Action In Odd Dimensional Space-Times,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 51 (1983) 2077.
[10]
L. Alvarez-Gaum´e, S. Della Pietra, and G. Moore, “Anomalies And Odd Dimensions,”
Ann. Phys. 163 (1985) 288.
[11]
I. M. Singer, “Families Of Dirac Operators With Applications To Physics,” in The
Mathematical Heritage Of Elie Cartan, Asterisque (1985) 323.
[12]
E. Witten, “Five-Branes And M-Theory On An Orbifold,” hepth/9512219.
[13]
K. Dasgupta and S. Mukhi, “Orbifolds Of M-Theory,” hepth/9512196.
[14]
R. Stong, “Calculation Of Ωspin
11 (K(Z, 4)),” in Uniﬁed String Theories, eds. M. B.
Green and D. J. Gross (World Scientiﬁc, 1986).
[15]
S. De Alwis, “Anomaly Cancellation In M-Theory,” hepth/9609211.
[16]
S. de Alwis, “A Note On Brane Tension And M-Theory,” hepth/9607011.
[17]
M. J. Duﬀ, “E8 × SO(16) Symmetry of d = 11 Supergravity?” in Quantum Field
Theory And Quantum Statistics, eds. I. A. Batalin, C. J. Isham, and G. A. Vilkoviski
(Adam Hilger, Ltd., Bristol, 1987), vol. 2., p, 209.
15
