Preprint typeset in JHEP style - HYPER VERSION Quantum Black Holes, Wall Crossing, and Mock Modular Forms Atish Dabholkar1,2, Sameer Murthy3, and Don Zagier4,5 1Theory Division, CERN, PH-TH Case C01600, CH-1211, 23 Geneva, Switzerland 2Sorbonne Universit´ es, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR 7589, LPTHE, F-75005, Paris, France CNRS, UMR 7589, LPTHE, F-75005, Paris, France 3NIKHEF theory group, Science Park 105, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands 4Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Mathematik,Vivatsgasse 7, 53111 Bonn, Germany 5Coll` ege de France, 3 Rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris, France Emails: atish@lpthe.jussieu.fr, murthy.sameer@gmail.com, don.zagier@mpim-bonn.mpg.de Abstract: We show that the meromorphic Jacobi form that counts the quarter-BPS states in N = 4 string theories can be canonically decomposed as a sum of a mock Jacobi form and an Appell-Lerch sum.
The quantum degeneracies of single-centered black holes are Fourier coeﬃcients of this mock Jacobi form, while the Appell-Lerch sum captures the degeneracies of multi-centered black holes which decay upon wall-crossing. The completion of the mock Jacobi form restores the modular symmetries expected from AdS3/CFT2 holography but has a holomorphic anomaly reﬂecting the non-compactness of the microscopic CFT. For every positive integral value m of the magnetic charge invariant of the black hole, our analysis leads to a special mock Jacobi form of weight two and index m, which we characterize uniquely up to a Jacobi cusp form. This family of special forms and another closely related family of weight-one forms contain almost all the known mock modular forms including the mock theta functions of Ramanujan, the generating function of Hurwitz-Kronecker class numbers, the mock modular forms appearing in the Mathieu and Umbral moonshine, as well as an inﬁnite number of new examples.
Keywords: black holes, mock modular forms, superstrings, wall-crossing.
arXiv:1208.4074v2 [hep-th] 3 Apr 2014 Contents 1.
Introduction 3 1.1 Introduction for mathematicians 3 1.2 Introduction for physicists 6 1.3 Organization of the paper 12 2.
Review of Type-II superstring theory on K3 × T 2 12 3.
Modular forms in one variable 17 3.1 Basic deﬁnitions and properties 18 3.2 Quantum black holes and modular forms 21 4.
Jacobi forms 23 4.1 Basic deﬁnitions 23 4.2 Theta expansion and Taylor expansion 24 4.3 Example: Jacobi forms of index 1 27 4.4 Hecke-like operators 29 4.5 Quantum black holes and Jacobi forms 32 5.
Siegel modular forms 33 5.1 Deﬁnitions and examples of Siegel modular forms 33 5.2 Quantum black holes and Siegel modular forms 36 6.
Walls and contours 37 7.
Mock modular forms 40 7.1 Pure mock modular forms 40 7.2 Mock Jacobi forms 44 7.3 Mock modular forms: the general case 48 7.4 Superconformal characters and mock modular forms 50 8.
From meromorphic Jacobi forms to mock modular forms 51 8.1 The Fourier coeﬃcients of a meromorphic Jacobi form 52 8.2 The polar part of ϕ (case of simple poles) 53 8.3 Mock modularity of the Fourier coeﬃcients 57 8.4 The case of double poles 61 8.5 Examples 64 – 1 – 9.
Special mock Jacobi forms 67 9.1 The simplest meromorphic Jacobi forms 67 9.2 Choosing the function ϕ for weight 2 and small index 69 9.3 Further data and formulation of main results for the weight 2 family 75 9.4 Optimal choice of the function Φ2,m 81 9.5 Observations on the weight one family, integrality, and positivity 86 9.6 Higher weights 95 10. Structure theorems for Jacobi and mock Jacobi forms 98 10.1 Relations among the polar coeﬃcients of weak Jacobi forms 98 10.2 Choosing optimal versions of weak elliptic forms 102 10.3 The residues of mock Jacobi forms 107 10.4 Remaining proofs of theorems from §9 109 11. Quantum black holes and mock modular forms 115 11.1 Mock Jacobi forms, immortal black holes, and AdS2 holography 115 11.2 Meromorphy, mock modularity, and noncompactness 120 11.3 The M-Theory limit and AdS3 holography 122 11.4 Open problems and comments 126 A. Appendix: Tables of special mock Jacobi forms 130 A.1 Table of QM (weight 2 case) 130 A.2 Table of Φ0 1,m of optimal growth 134 A.3 Table of QM (weight 1 case) 139 B. Bibliography 144 “My dream is that I will live to see the day when our young physicists, struggling to bring the predictions of superstring theory into correspondence with the facts of nature, will be led to enlarge their analytic machinery to include not only theta-functions but mock theta-functions ...
But before this can happen, the purely mathematical exploration of the mock-modular forms and their mock-symmetries must be carried a great deal further.” Freeman Dyson (1987 Ramanujan Centenary Conference) – 2 – 1. Introduction The quantum degeneracies associated with a black hole horizon are of central importance in quantum gravity. The counting function for these degeneracies for a large class of black holes in string theory is expected to be modular from the perspective of holography. However, in situations with wall-crossing, there is an apparent loss of modularity and it is far from clear if and how such a counting function can be modular. In the context of quarter-BPS black holes in N = 4 supersymmetric theories, we develop the required analytic machinery that provides a complete answer to this question which leads naturally to the mathematics of mock modular forms. We present a number of new mathematical results motivated by but independent of these physical considerations.
Since this paper is of possible interest to both theoretical physicists (especially string theo-rists) and theoretical mathematicians (especially number theorists), we give two introductions in their respective dialects.
1.1 Introduction for mathematicians In the quantum theory of black holes in the context of string theory, the physical problem of counting the dimensions of certain eigenspaces (“the number of quarter-BPS dyonic states of a given charge”) has led to the study of Fourier coeﬃcients of certain meromorphic Siegel modular forms and to the question of the modular nature of the corresponding generating functions.
Using and reﬁning results of S. Zwegers [130], we show that these generating functions belong to the recently discovered class of functions called mock modular forms.
Since this notion is still not widely known, it will be reviewed in some detail (in §7.1). Very roughly, a mock modular form of weight k (more precisely, “pure” mock modular forms; we will also introduce a somewhat more general notion of “mixed” mock modular forms in §7.3) is a holomorphic function f in the upper half plane to which is associated a holomorphic modular form g of weight 2 −k, called the “shadow” of f, such that the sum of f and a suitable non-holomorphic integral of g transforms like a holomorphic modular form of weight k.
Functions of this type occur in several contexts in mathematics and mathematical physics: as certain q-hypergeometric series (like Ramanujan’s original mock theta functions), as generating functions of class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds [126], or as characters of extended superconformal algebras [99], with special cases of the last class being conjecturally related to the Mathieu group M24 [52]. They also arise, as was shown by Zwegers in his thesis [130], as the Fourier coeﬃcients of meromorphic Jacobi forms. It is this last occurrence which is at the origin of the connection to black hole physics, because the Fourier coeﬃcients of meromorphic Jacobi forms have the same wall-crossing behavior as that exhibited by the degeneracies of BPS states.
– 3 – The speciﬁc meromorphic Jacobi forms that are of interest for the black hole counting problem are the Fourier-Jacobi coeﬃcients ψm(τ, z) of the meromorphic Siegel modular form 1 Φ10(Ω) = ∞ X m=−1 ψm(τ, z) pm ,  Ω=  τ z z σ  , p = e2πiσ , (1.1) the reciprocal of the Igusa cusp form of weight 10, which arises as the partition function of quarter-BPS dyons in the type II compactiﬁcation on the product of a K3 surface and an elliptic curve [51, 109, 42]. These coeﬃcients, after multiplication by the discriminant function ∆(τ), are meromorphic Jacobi forms of weight 2 with a double pole at z = 0 and no others (up to translation by the period lattice).
The new mathematical results of the paper are contained in Sections 8, 9 and 10. In §8, extending the results of [130], we show that any meromorphic Jacobi form ϕ(τ, z) having poles only at torsion points z = ατ + β (α, β ∈Q) has a canonical decomposition into two pieces ϕF(τ, z) and ϕP(τ, z), called its “ﬁnite” part and “polar” part, respectively, of which the ﬁrst is a ﬁnite linear combination of classical theta series with mock modular forms as coeﬃ-cients, and the second is an elementary expression that is determined completely by the poles of ϕ. Again using the results of Zwegers, we give explicit formulas for the polar part ϕP for all ϕ having only simple or double poles. In the particular case of ψm, the polar part is given by the formula ψP m(τ, z) = p24(m + 1) ∆(τ) A2,m(τ, z)  q = e2πiτ , y = e2πiz , (1.2) where ∆(τ) is the Ramanujan discriminant function, p24(m+1) the coeﬃcient of qm in ∆(τ)−1, and A2,m(τ, z) the elementary function (Appell-Lerch sum) A2,m(τ, z) = X s∈Z qms2+sy2ms+1 (1 −qsy)2 .
(1.3) Note that A2,m exhibits wall-crossing: for 0 < Im(z) < Im(τ) it has the Fourier expansion A2,m(τ, z) = X r≥ℓ>0 r ≡ℓ(mod 2m) ℓq r2−ℓ2 4m yr , (1.4) but the Fourier expansions are diﬀerent in other strips n < Im(z)/Im(τ) < n + 1.
This wall-crossing is at the heart of both the mathematical and the physical theories.
On the mathematical side it explains the “mockness” of the ﬁnite part ψF m of ψm. On the physical side it has an interpretation in terms of counting two-centered black holes, with the integer ℓin (1.4) being the dimension of the SU(2) multiplet with angular momentum (ℓ−1)/2 contained in the electromagnetic ﬁeld produced by the two centers.
– 4 – Starting in §9 we focus attention on two particular classes of functions {ϕ1,m} and {ϕ2,m}, where ϕk,m is a meromorphic Jacobi form of weight k ∈{1, 2} and index m ∈N having singular part (2πiz)−k + O(1) as z →0 and no other poles except the translates of this one by the period lattice. These functions in the case k = 2 are related to the Fourier coeﬃcients ψm deﬁned in (1.1) by ψm(τ, z) = p24(m + 1) ∆(τ) ϕ2,m(τ, z) + (weakly holomorphic Jacobi form).
(1.5) The polar part of ϕ2,m is the function A2,m deﬁned above, and that of ϕ1,m an Appell-Lerch sum A1,m with a similar deﬁnition (eq. (9.6)), but the functions themselves are not unique, since we can add to them any (weak) Jacobi forms of weight k and index m without changing the deﬁning property. This will change the mock Jacobi form Φk,m = ϕF k,m in the corresponding way. Much of our analysis concerns ﬁnding “optimal” choices, meaning choices for which the functions Φk,m have poles of as small an order as possible at inﬁnity and consequently Fourier coeﬃcients whose asymptotic growth is as small as possible. Our main results concern the case k = 2, and are as follows: 1. If m is a prime power, then the functions Φ2,m can be chosen to be strongly holomor-phic (i.e., with Fourier expansions containing only monomials qnyr with 4nm −r2 ≥0).
Their Fourier coeﬃcients then have polynomial growth and are given by explicit linear combinations of class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds.
2. More generally, for arbitrary m, the function Φ2,m can be chosen to be the sum of the im-ages under appropriate “Hecke-like operators” of special mock Jacobi forms QM, where M ranges over all divisors of m having an even number of distinct prime factors. These sum-mands are the eigencomponents of Φ2,m with respect to the Atkin-Lehner-like operators Wm1 (m1|m, (m1, m/m1) = 1) acting on the space of mock Jacobi forms of index m.
3. The mock Jacobi form Q1 is the generating function of class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds, and is strongly holomorphic. The other special mock Jacobi forms QM (M = 6, 10, 14, . . . ) can be chosen to have “optimal growth” (meaning that their Fourier expansions contain only monomials qnyr with 4nm −r2 ≥−1). Their Fourier coeﬃcients then grow like eπ √ ∆/m as ∆:= 4nm −r2 tends to inﬁnity.
4. One can also choose Φ2,m(τ, z) for arbitrary m ≥1 to be of the form P Φ0 2,m/d2(τ, dz), where d ranges over positive integers with d2|m and each Φ0 2,m/d2 has optimal growth.
5. There are explicit formulas for the polar coeﬃcients (those with ∆< 0) of Φ0 2,m and QM.
In particular, the coeﬃcient of qnyr in QM vanishes if 4nM −r2 = 0 and equals ±ϕ(M)/12 if 4nM −r2 = −1, where ϕ(M) = Q p|M(p −1) is the Euler ϕ-function of M.
The proofs of these properties are contained in §10, which gives a detailed description (based on diﬃcult results on Jacobi forms proved in [114, 115]) of the way that the space of holomorphic – 5 – Jacobi forms is contained in the spaces of weak or of weakly holomorphic Jacobi forms. This analysis contains several surprises, such as the result (Theorem 9.4) that for all m ≥1 the space of holomorphic Jacobi forms of index m has codimension exactly 1 in the space of Jacobi forms of index m with optimal growth.
For ϕ1,m the description is much less complete. There is still a result like 2., with M now ranging over the divisors of m with an odd number of distinct prime factors, but it is no longer possible in general to choose the QM to have optimal growth. The few cases where this is possible turn out to be related to mock theta functions that have played a prominent role in the past. Thus Q30 and Q42 are essentially equal to the mock theta functions of “order 5” and “order 7” in Ramanujan’s original letter to Hardy, and Q2 and several of the other QM are related to the “Mathieu moonshine” and “Umbral moonshine” story [52, 25]. The mock Jacobi forms QM for the k = 2 case are also related to special mock theta functions, now of weight 3/2, e.g. Q6 is the mock theta function with shadow η(τ) given in [129].
The applications of the results (for the k = 2 case, via the fact that ψm is the sum of p24(m + 1)ϕ2,m/∆and a weakly holomorphic Jacobi form of weight −10 and index m) to the original physics problem are explained in §11 and in the following “second introduction.” 1.2 Introduction for physicists The microscopic quantum description of supersymmetric black holes in string theory usually starts with a brane conﬁguration of given charges and mass at weak coupling, which is localized at a single point in the noncompact spacetime. One then computes an appropriate indexed partition function in the world-volume theory of the branes, which from the perspective of enu-merative geometry computes topological invariants such as the Donaldson-Thomas invariants.
At strong coupling, the brane conﬁguration gravitates and the indexed partition function is ex-pected to count the microstates of the corresponding macroscopic gravitational conﬁgurations.
Assuming that the gravitational conﬁguration is a single-centered black hole then gives a way to obtain a statistical understanding of the entropy of the black hole in terms of its microstates, in accordance with the Boltzmann relation1.
One problem that one often encounters is that the macroscopic conﬁgurations are no longer localized at a point and include not only a single-centered black hole of interest but also several multi-centered ones [46, 47, 11, 48]. Moreover, the indexed degeneracy of the multi-centered conﬁgurations typically jumps upon crossing walls of marginal stability in the moduli space where the multi-centered conﬁguration breaks up into its single-centered constituents. These jumps are referred to as the ‘wall-crossing phenomenon’.
If one is interested in the physics of the horizon or the microstates of a single black hole, the multi-centered conﬁgurations and the associated wall-crossings are thus something of a nuisance.
1Under certain conditions the index equals the absolute number [106, 107, 37].
– 6 – It is desirable to have a mathematical characterization that isolates the single-centered black holes directly at the microscopic level. One distinguishing feature of single-centered black holes is that they are ‘immortal’ in that they exist as stable quantum states for all values of the moduli and hence their degeneracy does not exhibit the wall-crossing phenomenon. We will use this property later to deﬁne the counting function for the immortal black holes.
The wall-crossing phenomenon raises important conceptual questions regarding the proper holographic formulation in this context. In many cases, the black hole can be viewed as an excitation of a black string. The near horizon geometry of a black string is AdS3 which is expected to be holographically dual to a two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory CFT2. The conformal boundary of Euclidean AdS3 is a 2-torus with a complex structure parameter τ, and the physical partition function of AdS3 and of the boundary CFT2 is a function of τ. The SL(2, Z) transformations of τ can be identiﬁed geometrically with global diﬀeomorphisms of the boundary of AdS3 space. The partition function is expected to have good modular properties under this geometric symmetry. This symmetry is crucial for the Rademacher-type expansions of the black hole degeneracies for understanding the quantum entropy of these black holes via holography [106, 107, 35, 49, 44, 89, 117, 95, 90, 36]. Implementing the modular symmetries presents several subtleties in situations when there is wall-crossing.
The wall-crossing phenomenon has another important physical implication for the invari-ance of the spectrum under large gauge transformations of the antisymmetric tensor ﬁeld.
Large gauge transformations lead to the ‘spectral ﬂow symmetry’ of the partition function of the black string [44]. Since these transformations act both on the charges and the moduli, degeneracies of states with a charge vector Γ at some point φ in the moduli space get mapped to the degeneracies of states with charge vector Γ′ at some other point φ′ in the moduli space.
Typically, there are many walls separating the point φ′ and the original point φ. As a result, the degeneracies extracted from the black string at a given point φ in the moduli space do not exhibit the spectral-ﬂow symmetry. On the other hand, the spectrum of immortal black holes is independent of asymptotic moduli and hence must exhibit the spectral-ﬂow symmetry. This raises the question as to how to make the spectral-ﬂow symmetry manifest for the degeneracies of immortal black holes in the generic situation when there is wall-crossing.
With these motivations, our objective will be to isolate the partition functions of the black string associated with immortal black holes and investigate their transformation properties under the boundary modular group and large gauge transformations. More precisely, we would like to investigate the following four questions.
1. Can one deﬁne a microscopic counting function that cleanly isolates the microstates of immortal black holes from those of the multi-centered black conﬁgurations?
2. What are the modular properties of the counting function of immortal black holes when the asymptotic spectrum exhibits the wall-crossing phenomenon?
– 7 – 3. Can this counting function be related to a quantity that is properly modular as might be expected from the perspective of near-horizon AdS3/CFT2 holography?
4. Can one deﬁne a partition function of the immortal black holes that manifestly exhibits the spectral-ﬂow symmetry resulting from large gauge transformations?
The main diﬃculties in answering these questions stem from the complicated moduli de-pendence of the black hole spectrum which is often extremely hard to compute. To address the central conceptual issues in a tractable context, we consider the compactiﬁcation of Type-II on K3 × T 2 with N = 4 supersymmetry in four dimensions. The spectrum of quarter-BPS dyonic states in this model is exactly computable [51, 60, 109, 110, 85, 42] and by now is well understood at all points in the moduli space [105, 31, 26] and for all possible duality orbits [31, 7, 8, 6, 33].
Moreover, as we will see, this particular model exhibits almost all of the essential issues that we wish to address. The N = 4 black holes have the remarkable property that even though their spectrum is moduli-dependent, the partition function itself is moduli-independent. The entire moduli dependence of the black hole degeneracy is captured by the moduli dependence of the choice of the Fourier contour [105, 31, 26]. Moreover, the only multi-centered conﬁgurations that contribute to the supersymmetric index of quarter-BPS states are the ones with only two centers, each of which is half-BPS [38]. Consequently, the only way the index can jump at a wall is by the decay of a two-centered conﬁguration into its half-BPS constituents [105, 31, 26]; this is a considerable simpliﬁcation compared to the general N = 2 case where more complicated multi-centered decays are possible. These features make the N = 4 case much more tractable.
The number of microstates of quarter-BPS dyonic states for the above-mentioned com-pactiﬁcation is given by a Fourier coeﬃcient of a meromorphic Jacobi form ψm(τ, z) with a moduli-dependent contour. The partition function (1.1) referred to earlier is the generating function for these meromorphic Jacobi forms. Using this simplicity of the moduli dependence and the knowledge of the exact spectrum, it is possible to give very precise answers to the above questions in the N = 4 framework, which turn out to naturally involve mock modular forms.
1. One can deﬁne a holomorphic function for counting the microstates of immortal black holes2 as a Fourier coeﬃcient of the partition function of the black string for a speciﬁc choice of the Fourier contour [105, 31, 26].
The contour corresponds to choosing the asymptotic moduli of the theory in the attractor region of the single-centered black hole.
2. Because the asymptotic counting function is a meromorphic Jacobi form, the near horizon counting function of immortal black holes is a mock modular form in that it fails to be 2We will use the terms ‘immortal’ and ‘single-centered’ interchangeably. In general, the moduli-independent ‘immortal’ degeneracies can receive contributions not only from single black holes but also from scaling solutions [48]. They are not expected to contribute to the N = 4 index that we consider [38]. In addition, there can be ‘hair’ degrees of freedom [10, 75], which are degrees of freedom localized outside the black hole horizon that carry part of the charge of the black hole. In frames where the black hole is represented entirely in terms of D-branes, such hair modes are expected to be absent.
– 8 – modular but in a very speciﬁc way. The failure of modularity is governed by a shadow, which is given in terms of another holomorphic modular form.
3. Given a mock modular form and its shadow, one can deﬁne its completion which is a non-holomorphic modular form. The failure of holomorphy can be viewed as a ‘holomorphic anomaly’ which is also governed by the shadow.
4. The partition function of immortal black holes with manifest spectral-ﬂow invariance is a mock Jacobi form – a new mathematical object deﬁned and elaborated upon in §7.2.
The main physical payoﬀof the mathematics of mock modular forms in this context is the guarantee that one can still deﬁne a completion as in (3) which is modular albeit non-holomorphic. As mentioned earlier, the modular transformations on the τ parameter can be identiﬁed with global diﬀeomorphisms of the boundary of the near horizon AdS3. This connec-tion makes the mathematics of mock modular forms physically very relevant for AdS3/CFT2 holography in the presence of wall-crossing and holomorphic anomalies. The required mathe-matical results concerning mock modular forms are developed in sections §7, §8, §9, and §10.
To orient the physics reader, we summarize the essential conclusions of this mathematical investigation from the perspective of the questions posed above.
1. Decomposition: Given an asymptotic counting function, the degeneracies of single-centered black holes can be isolated using the results in §8. Applying Theorem 8.3 to the meromorphic Jacobi form ψm(τ, z) gives a unique decomposition ψm(τ, z) = ψF m(τ, z) + ψP m(τ, z) , (1.6) such that ψP m(τ, z) is a simple function (1.2) with the same pole structure in z as ψm(τ, z) and ψF m(τ, z) has no poles. The elegant decomposition (1.6) is motivated partly by the choice of ‘attractor contour’ for single-centered black holes and and has a direct physical interpretation: ψm(τ, z) is the counting function of all asymptotic states including both single and multi-centered conﬁgurations, ψF m(τ, z) is the counting function of immortal black holes, whereas ψP m(τ, z) is the counting function of multi-centered black holes.
Since both ψm(τ, z) and ψP m(τ, z) have poles in z, their Fourier coeﬃcients depend on the choice of the contour which in turn depends on the moduli. On the other hand, the Fourier coeﬃcients of ψF m(τ, z) are unambiguously deﬁned without any contour or moduli dependence. This is what is expected for immortal black holes.
2. Modular Completion: The immortal counting function ψF m(τ, z) deﬁned by the de-composition (1.6) is not modular. However, theorem 8.3 ensures that by adding a spe-ciﬁc nonholomorphic function to ψF m(τ, z), one can obtain its nonholomorphic completion – 9 – b ψF m(τ, z) which is modular and transforms as a Jabobi form. The failure of holomorphy of the completion b ψF m(τ, z) is given by the equation τ 3/2 2 ∂ ∂τ b ψF m(τ, z) = r m 8πi p24(m + 1) ∆(τ) X ℓmod (2m) ϑm,ℓ(τ, 0) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) .
(1.7) Hence the counting function of immortal black holes has a hidden modular symmetry and more speciﬁcally is a mock Jacobi form as deﬁned in §7.2. This is one of our main physics results and is described in more detail in §11.
3. Holomorphic anomaly: The completion is a natural object to be identiﬁed with the indexed partition function of the superconformal ﬁeld theory SCFT2 dual to a single-centered AdS3, which is expected to be modular.
From this perspective, the equation (1.7) can be viewed as a holomorphic anomaly and can in fact be taken as a deﬁning property of a mock Jacobi form for physics appli-cations. Naively, an indexed partition function is expected to be holomorphic because of a cancellation between right-moving bosons and fermions as for the elliptic genus [123].
However, if the SCFT2 is noncompact, then the spectrum is continuous and this naive reasoning may fail leading to an ‘anomaly’. The holomorphic anomaly can then arise as a consequence of the fact that for the right-movers in a noncompact SCFT, the density of states of bosons and fermions may be slightly diﬀerent [119, 4] and may not precisely cancel. The detailed connection between the holomorphic anomaly and the noncompact-ness of the SCFT2 in this context needs to be understood better from a path-integral perspective.
4. Optimality: The Fourier coeﬃcients of ψF m(τ, z) grow exponentially rapidly as expected for a counting function of black hole degeneracies. It is clear from the anomaly equation (1.7) that if we add a holomorphic true Jacobi form to ψF m(τ, z) with the same weight and index, it will still admit a modular completion satisfying the same anomaly equation.
This raises the question whether for a given holomorphic anomaly there is an ‘optimal’ mock Jacobi form whose Fourier coeﬃcients grow as slowly as possible. The answer to this question (for the functions ϕ2,m related to ψm by (1.5)) is in the aﬃrmative but is subtle and requires several new results in the theory of Jacobi forms developed in §10, motivated by and explaining the numerical experiments and observations described in §9.
A practical implication of such an optimal choice is that the leading contribution to the black hole entropy is then determined essentially by a Fourier coeﬃcient of a true Jacobi form. One can thus apply the familiar Cardy formula and the Rademacher expansion of the Fourier coeﬃcients of true modular forms for the leading answer. There will be – 10 – exponentially subleading corrections to this leading answer coming from the optimal mock Jacobi form. A Rademacher expansion for these corrections requires a generalization [13, 16] applicable for mock rather than true modular forms.
5. Examples: Modular forms with slowly growing Fourier coeﬃcients are mathematically particularly interesting and many of the best-known examples of mock modular forms share this property. An ‘optimal’ choice thus enables us in many cases to obtain a very explicit expression for the immortal counting function ψF m(τ, z) in terms of these known mock modular forms. For example, for all m prime, the optimal mock part of ψF m(τ, z) can be expressed in terms of the generating function of Hurwitz-Kronecker class numbers (see §9.2). On the other hand, for a nonprime m our analysis leads to new mock modular forms with very slowly growing Fourier coeﬃcients.
The functions ψm(τ, z) that arise in the black hole problem have a double pole at z = 0 and its translates, but our methods can also be applied to a related class of functions with just a single pole at z = 0. This leads to a second inﬁnite family of mock modular forms, this time of weight 1/2. (In the double pole case, the mock Jacobi forms had weight 2 and their coeﬃcients were mock modular forms of weight 3/2. In both cases, the coeﬃcients are in fact mock theta functions, i.e., mock modular forms whose shadows are unary theta series.) Unlike the ﬁrst case, where we found that the mock modular forms occurring can always be chosen to have at most simple poles at the cusps, the pole order here is much greater in general, and there are only a handful of examples having only simple poles. It is remarkable that these include essentially all the most prominent examples of mock theta functions, including the original ones of Ramanujan, the mock theta function conjecturally related to the Mathieu group M24 [52] and the functions arising in the umbral moonshine conjecture [24].
Modular symmetries are very powerful in physics applications because they relate strong coupling to weak coupling, or high temperature to low temperature.
The hidden modular symmetry of mock modular forms is therefore expected to be useful in diverse physics contexts.
As mentioned above, mock modularity of the counting function in the present context of black holes is a consequence of meromorphy of the asymptotic counting function which in turn is a consequence of noncompactness of the target space of the microscopic SCFT. Now, conformal ﬁeld theories with a noncompact target space occur naturally in several physics contexts. For example, a general class of four-dimensional BPS black holes is obtained as a supersymmetric D-brane conﬁguration in Type-II compactiﬁcation on a Calabi-Yau three-fold X6. In the M-theory limit, these black holes can be viewed as excitations of the MSW black string [87, 92].
The microscopic theory describing the low energy excitations of the MSW string is the (0, 4) MSW SCFT. The target space of this SCFT does not necessarily have to be compact in which – 11 – case the considerations of this paper will apply. Very similar objects [126, 73] have already made their appearance in the context of topological supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory on CP2 [120].
Other examples include the theory of multiple M5-branes [2] quantum Liouville theory and E-strings [91], and the SL(2, R)/U(1) SCFT [54, 119, 4] where the CFT is noncompact. The appearance of a holomorphic anomaly in the regularized Poincar´ e series for the elliptic genus of CFT2 was noted in [89] in the context of the AdS3/CFT2 correspondence.
We expect that the general framework of mock modular forms and Jacobi forms developed in this paper is likely to have varied physical applications in the context of non-compact conformal ﬁeld theories, wall-crossings in enumerative geometry, and recently formulated Mathieu and umbral moonshine conjectures [52, 24].
1.3 Organization of the paper In §2, we review the physics background concerning the string compactiﬁcation on K3 × T 2 and the classiﬁcation of BPS states corresponding to the supersymmetric black holes in this theory. In sections §3, §4, and §5, we review the basic mathematical deﬁnitions of various types of classical modular forms (elliptic, Jacobi, Siegel) and illustrate an application to the physics of quantum black holes in each case by means of an example. In §6, we review the moduli dependence of the Fourier contour prescription for extracting the degeneracies of quarter-BPS black holes in the N = 4 theory from the partition function which is a meromorphic Siegel modular form. In §8, we reﬁne results due to Zwegers to show that any meromorphic Jacobi form with poles only at the sub-multiples of the period lattice can be decomposed canonically into two pieces, one of which is a mock Jacobi form. We give explicit formulas for this decomposition in the case when the poles have at most order 2, and again give several examples.
In §9 we give a detailed description of the experimental results for the Fourier coeﬃcients of the two families of mock Jacobi forms {Φ2,m} and {Φ1,m}, and formulate the main mathematical results concerning them. The proofs of these results are given in §10, after we have formulated and proved a number of structural results about holomorphic and weakly holomorphic Jacobi forms that are new and may be of independent interest. In §11, we apply these results in the physical context to determine the mock Jacobi form that counts the degeneracies of single-centered black holes and discuss the implications for AdS2/CFT1 and AdS3/CFT2 holography.
2. Review of Type-II superstring theory on K3 × T 2 Superstring theories are naturally formulated in ten-dimensional Lorentzian spacetime M10.
A ‘compactiﬁcation’ to four-dimensions is obtained by taking M10 to be a product manifold R1,3 × X6 where X6 is a compact Calabi-Yau threefold and R1,3 is the noncompact Minkowski spacetime. We will focus in this paper on a compactiﬁcation of Type-II superstring theory when X6 is itself the product X6 = K3×T 2. A highly nontrivial and surprising result from the 90s is – 12 – the statement that this compactiﬁcation is quantum equivalent or ‘dual’ to a compactiﬁcation of heterotic string theory on T 4 × T 2 where T 4 is a four-dimensional torus [74, 124]. One can thus describe the theory either in the Type-II frame or the heterotic frame.
The four-dimensional theory in R1,3 resulting from this compactiﬁcation has N = 4 super-symmetry3. The massless ﬁelds in the theory consist of 22 vector multiplets in addition to the supergravity multiplet. The massless moduli ﬁelds consist of the S-modulus λ taking values in the coset SL(2, Z)\SL(2, R)/O(2, R), (2.1) and the T-moduli µ taking values in the coset O(22, 6, Z)\O(22, 6, R)/O(22, R) × O(6, R).
(2.2) The group of discrete identiﬁcations SL(2, Z) is called the S-duality group. In the heterotic frame, it is the electro-magnetic duality group [101, 102], whereas in the type-II frame, it is simply the group of area-preserving global diﬀeomorphisms of the T 2 factor. The group of discrete identiﬁcations O(22, 6, Z) is called the T-duality group. Part of the T-duality group O(19, 3, Z) can be recognized as the group of geometric identiﬁcations on the moduli space of K3; the other elements are stringy in origin and have to do with mirror symmetry.
At each point in the moduli space of the internal manifold K3 × T 2, one has a distinct four-dimensional theory. One would like to know the spectrum of particle states in this theory.
Particle states are unitary irreducible representations, or supermultiplets, of the N = 4 superal-gebra. The supermultiplets are of three types which have diﬀerent dimensions in the rest frame.
A long multiplet is 256-dimensional, an intermediate multiplet is 64-dimensional, and a short multiplet is 16-dimensional. A short multiplet preserves half of the eight supersymmetries (i.e.
it is annihilated by four supercharges) and is called a half-BPS state; an intermediate multiplet preserves one quarter of the supersymmetry (i.e. it is annihilated by two supercharges), and is called a quarter-BPS state; and a long multiplet does not preserve any supersymmetry and is called a non-BPS state. One consequence of the BPS property is that the spectrum of these states is ‘topological’ in that it does not change as the moduli are varied, except for jumps at certain walls in the moduli space [125].
An important property of a BPS states that follows from the superalgebra is that its mass is determined by its charges and the moduli [125]. Thus, to specify a BPS state at a given point in the moduli space, it suﬃces to specify its charges. The charge vector in this theory transforms in the vector representation of the T-duality group O(22, 6, Z) and in the 3This supersymmetry is a super Lie algebra containing ISO(1, 3) × SU(4) as the even subalgebra where ISO(1, 3) is the Poincar´ e symmetry of the R1,3 spacetime and SU(4) is an internal symmetry usually referred to as R-symmetry. The odd generators of the superalgebra are called supercharges. With N = 4 supersymmetry, there are eight complex supercharges which transform as a spinor of ISO(1, 3) and a fundamental of SU(4).
– 13 – fundamental representation of the S-duality group SL(2, Z). It is thus given by a vector ΓαI with integer entries ΓαI =  N I M I  where α = 1, 2 ; I = 1, 2, . . . 28 (2.3) transforming in the (2, 28) representation of SL(2, Z) × O(22, 6, Z). The vectors N and M can be regarded as the quantized electric and magnetic charge vectors of the state respectively. They both belong to an even, integral, self-dual lattice Π22,6. We will assume in what follows that Γ = (N, M) in (2.3) is primitive in that it cannot be written as an integer multiple of (N0, M0) for N0 and M0 belonging to Π22,6. A state is called purely electric if only N is non-zero, purely magnetic if only M is non- zero, and dyonic if both M and N are non-zero.
To deﬁne S-duality transformations, it is convenient to represent the S-modulus as a com-plex ﬁeld S taking values in the upper half plane. An S-duality transformation γ ≡  a b c d  ∈SL(2; Z) (2.4) acts simultaneously on the charges and the S-modulus by  N M  →  a b c d   N M  , S →aS + b cS + d .
(2.5) To deﬁne T-duality transformations, it is convenient to represent the T-moduli by a 28×28 matrix µA I satisfying µt L µ = L (2.6) with the identiﬁcation that µ ∼kµ for every k ∈O(22; R) × O(6; R). Here L is the 28 × 28 matrix LIJ =   −C16 0 0 0 0 I6 0 I6 0  , (2.7) with Is the s × s identity matrix and C16 is the Cartan matrix of E8 × E8 . The T-moduli are then represented by the matrix M = µtµ (2.8) which satisiﬁes Mt = M , MtLM = L .
(2.9) In this basis, a T-duality transformation can then be represented by a 28 × 28 matrix R with integer entries satisfying RtLR = L , (2.10) – 14 – which acts simultaneously on the charges and the T-moduli by N →RN; M →RM ; µ →µR−1 (2.11) Given the matrix µA I , one obtains an embedding Λ22,6 ⊂R22,6 of Π22,6 which allows us to deﬁne the moduli-dependent charge vectors Q and P by QA = µA I NI , P A = µA I MI .
(2.12) The matrix L has a 22-dimensional eigensubspace with eigenvalue −1 and a 6- dimensional eigensubspace with eigenvalue +1.
Given Q and P, one can deﬁne the ‘right-moving’ and ‘left-moving’ charges4 QR,L and PL,R as the projections QR,L = (1 ± L) 2 Q ; PR,L = (1 ± L) 2 P .
(2.13) If the vectors N and M are nonparallel, then the state is quarter-BPS. On the other hand, if N = pN0 and M = qN0 for some N0 ∈Π22,6 with p and q relatively prime integers, then the state is half-BPS.
An important piece of nonperturbative information about the dynamics of the theory is the exact spectrum of all possible dyonic BPS-states at all points in the moduli space. More speciﬁcally, one would like to compute the number d(Γ)|S,µ of dyons of a given charge Γ at a speciﬁc point (S, µ) in the moduli space. Computation of these numbers is of course a very complicated dynamical problem. In fact, for a string compactiﬁcation on a general Calabi-Yau threefold, the answer is not known.
One main reason for focusing on this particular compactiﬁcation on K3 × T 2 is that in this case the dynamical problem has been essentially solved and the exact spectrum of dyons is now known. Furthermore, the results are easy to summarize and the numbers d(Γ)|S,µ are given in terms of Fourier coeﬃcients of various modular forms.
In view of the duality symmetries, it is useful to classify the inequivalent duality or-bits labeled by various duality invariants.
This leads to an interesting problem in num-ber theory of classiﬁcation of inequivalent duality orbits of various duality groups such as SL(2, Z) × O(22, 6; Z) in our case and more exotic groups like E7,7(Z) for other choices of com-pactiﬁcation manifold X6. It is important to remember though that a duality transformation acts simultaneously on charges and the moduli. Thus, it maps a state with charge Γ at a point in the moduli space (S, µ) to a state with charge Γ′ but at some other point in the moduli space (S′, µ′). In this respect, the half-BPS and quarter-BPS dyons behave diﬀerently.
4The right-moving charges couple to the graviphoton vector ﬁelds associated with the right-moving chiral currents in the conformal ﬁeld theory of the dual heterotic string.
– 15 – • For half-BPS states, the spectrum does not depend on the moduli. Hence d(Γ)|S′,µ′ = d(Γ)|S,µ. Furthermore, by an S-duality transformation one can choose a frame where the charges are purely electric with M = 0 and N ̸= 0. Single-particle states have N primitive and the number of states depends only on the T-duality invariant integer n ≡N 2/2. We can thus denote the degeneracy of half-BPS states d(Γ)|S′,µ′ simply by d(n).
• For quarter-BPS states, the spectrum does depend on the moduli, and d(Γ)|S′,µ′ ̸= d(Γ)|S,µ.
However, the partition function turns out to be independent of moduli and hence it is enough to classify the inequivalent duality orbits to label the partition func-tions. For the speciﬁc duality group SL(2, Z) × O(22, 6; Z) the partition functions are essentially labeled by a single discrete invariant [31, 5, 6].
I = gcd(N ∧M) , (2.14) The degeneracies themselves are Fourier coeﬃcients of the partition function.
For a given value of I, they depend only on5 the moduli and the three T-duality invariants (m, n, ℓ) ≡(M 2/2, N 2/2, N · M). Integrality of (m, n, ℓ) follows from the fact that both N and M belong to Π22,6. We can thus denote the degeneracy of these quarter-BPS states d(Γ)|S,µ simply by d(m, n, l)|S,µ. For simplicity, we consider only I = 1 in this paper.
Given this classiﬁcation, it is useful to choose a representative set of charges that can sample all possible values of the three T-duality invariants. For this purpose, we choose a point in the moduli space where the torus T 2 is a product of two circles S1 × ˜ S1 and choose the following charges in a Type-IIB frame.
• For electric charges, we take n units of momentum along the circle S1, and ˜ K Kaluza-Klein monopoles associated with the circle ˜ S1.
• For magnetic charges, we take Q1 units of D1-brane charge wrapping S1, Q5 D5-brane wrapping K3 × S1 and l units of momentum along the ˜ S1 circle.
We can thus write Γ =  N M  =  0, n; 0, ˜ K Q1, ˜ n; Q5, 0  .
(2.15) The T-duality quadratic invariants can be computed using a restriction of the matrix (2.7) to a Λ(2,2) Narain lattice of the form L =  0 I2 I2 0  , (2.16) 5There is an additional dependence on arithmetic T-duality invariants but the degeneracies for states with nontrivial values of these T-duality invariants can be obtained from the degeneracies discussed here by demanding S-duality invariance [6].
– 16 – to obtain M 2/2 = Q1Q5 , N 2/2 = n ˜ K , N · M = ˜ n ˜ K .
(2.17) We can simply the notation further by choosing ˜ K = Q5 = 1, Q1 = m, ˜ n = l to obtain M 2/2 = m, N 2/2 = n, N · M = l .
(2.18) For this set of charges, we can focus our attention on a subset of T-moduli associated with the torus T 2 parametrized by M =  G−1 G−1B −BG−1 G −BG−1B  , (2.19) where Gij is the metric on the torus and Bij is the antisymmetric tensor ﬁeld. Let U = U1 +iU2 be the complex structure parameter, A be the area, and ϵij be the Levi-Civita symbol with ϵ12 = −ϵ21 = 1, then Gij = A U2  1 U1 U1 |U|2  and Bij = ABϵij , (2.20) and the complexiﬁed K¨ ahler modulus U = U1 + iU2 is deﬁned as U := B + iA. The S-modulus S = S1 + S2 is deﬁned as S := a + i exp (−2φ) (2.21) where a is the axion and φ is the dilaton ﬁeld in the four dimensional heterotic frame. the relevant moduli can be parametrized by three complex scalars S, T, U which deﬁne the so-called ‘STU’ model in N = 2 supergravity. Note that these moduli are labeled naturally in the heterotic frame which are related to the SB, TB, and UB moduli in the Type-IIB frame by S = UB, T = SB, U = TB .
(2.22) 3. Modular forms in one variable Before discussing mock modular forms, it is useful to recall the variety of modular objects that have already made their appearance in the context of counting black holes. In the following sections we give the basic deﬁnitions of modular forms, Jacobi forms, and Siegel forms, using the notations that are standard in the mathematics literature, and then in each case illustrate a physics application to counting quantum black holes by means of an example.
In the physics context, these modular forms arise as generating functions for counting various quantum black holes in string theory. The structure of poles of the counting function is of particular importance in physics, since it determines the asymptotic growth of the Fourier coeﬃcients as well as the contour dependence of the Fourier coeﬃcients which corresponds to the wall crossing phenomenon. These examples will also be relevant later in §11 in connection with mock modular forms. We suggest chapters I and III of [21] respectively as a good general reference for classical and Siegel modular forms and [57] for Jacobi modular forms.
– 17 – 3.1 Basic deﬁnitions and properties Let H be the upper half plane, i.e., the set of complex numbers τ whose imaginary part satisﬁes Im(τ) > 0. Let SL(2, Z) be the group of matrices   a b c d  with integer entries such that ad −bc = 1.
A modular form f(τ) of weight k on SL(2, Z) is a holomorphic function on I H, that trans-forms as f(aτ + b cτ + d) = (cτ + d)k f(τ) ∀  a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z) , (3.1) for an integer k (necessarily even if f(0) ̸= 0). It follows from the deﬁnition that f(τ) is periodic under τ →τ + 1 and can be written as a Fourier series f(τ) = ∞ X n=−∞ a(n) qn  q := e2πiτ , (3.2) and is bounded as Im(τ) →∞. If a(0) = 0, then the modular form vanishes at inﬁnity and is called a cusp form. Conversely, one may weaken the growth condition at ∞to f(τ) = O(q−N) rather than O(1) for some N ≥0; then the Fourier coeﬃcients of f have the behavior a(n) = 0 for n < −N. Such a function is called a weakly holomorphic modular form.
The vector space over C of holomorphic modular forms of weight k is usually denoted by Mk. Similarly, the space of cusp forms of weight k and the space of weakly holomorphic modular forms of weight k are denoted by Sk and M !
k respectively. We thus have the inclusion Sk ⊂Mk ⊂M !
k .
(3.3) The Fourier coeﬃcients of the modular forms in these spaces have diﬀerent growth properties: 1. f ∈Sk ⇒an = O(nk/2) as n →∞; 2. f ∈Mk ⇒an = O(nk−1) as n →∞; 3. f ∈M !
k ⇒an = O(eC√n) as n →∞for some C > 0 .
Some important modular forms on SL(2, Z) are: 1. The Eisenstein series Ek ∈Mk (k ≥4). The ﬁrst two of these are E4(τ) = 1 + 240 ∞ X n=1 n3qn 1 −qn = 1 + 240q + 2160q2 + · · · , (3.4) E6(τ) = 1 −504 ∞ X n=1 n5qn 1 −qn = 1 −504q −16632q2 −· · · .
(3.5) – 18 – 2. The discriminant function ∆. It is given by the product expansion ∆(τ) = q ∞ Y n=1 (1 −qn)24 = q −24q2 + 252q3 + ...
(3.6) or by the formula ∆= (E3 4 −E2 6) /1728. We mention for later use that the function E2(τ) = 1 2πi ∆′(τ) ∆(τ) = 1−24 ∞ P n=1 nqn 1 −qn is also an Eisenstein series, but is not modular. (It is a so-called quasimodular form, meaning in this case that the non-holomorphic function b E2(τ) = E2(τ) − 3 π Im(τ) transforms like a modular form of weight 2.) This function can be used to form the Ramanujan-Serre derivative ∂RS k : Mk →Mk+2 , ∂RS k f(τ) := 1 2πi f ′(τ) −k 12 E2(τ) f(τ) .
(3.7) The ring of modular forms on SL(2, Z) is generated freely by E4 and E6, so any modular form of weight k can be written (uniquely) as a sum of monomials Eα 4 Eβ 6 with 4α+6β = k. We also have Mk = C · Ek ⊕Sk and Sk = ∆· Mk−12, so any f ∈Mk also has a unique expansion as P[k/12] n=0 αn Ek−12n ∆n (with E0 = 1 and E2 replaced by 0). From either representation, we see that a modular form is uniquely determined by its weight and ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients.
Given two modular forms (f, g) of weight (k, l), one can produce a sequence of modular forms of weight k + l + 2n, n ≥0 using the Rankin-Cohen bracket [f, g]n = [f, g](k,l) n = X r+s=n (−1)s k + n −1 r  ℓ+ n −1 s  f (s)(τ)g(r)(τ) (3.8) where f (m) :=   1 2πi d dτ m f. For n = 0, this is simply the product of the two forms, while for n > 0 we always have [f, g]n ∈Sk+l+2n. The ﬁrst two non-trivial examples are [E4, E6]1 = −3456 ∆, [E4, E4]2 = 4800 ∆.
(3.9) As well as modular forms on the full modular group SL(2, Z), one can also consider modular forms on subgroups of ﬁnite index, with the same transformation law (3.1) and suitable condi-tions on the Fourier coeﬃcients to deﬁne the notions of holomorphic, weakly holomorphic and cusp forms. The weight k now need no longer be even, but can be odd or even half integral, the easiest way to state the transformation property when k ∈Z + 1 2 being to say that f(τ)/θ(τ)2k is invariant under some congruence subgroup of SL(2, Z), where θ(τ) = P n∈Z qn2. The graded vector space of modular forms on a ﬁxed subgroup Γ ⊂SL(2, Z) is ﬁnite dimensional in each weight, ﬁnitely generated as an algebra, and closed under Rankin-Cohen brackets. Important – 19 – examples of modular forms of half-integral weight are the unary theta series, i.e., theta series associated to a quadratic form in one variable. They come in two types: X n∈Z ε(n) qλn2 for some λ ∈Q+ and some even periodic function ε (3.10) and X n∈Z n ε(n) qλn2 for some λ ∈Q+ and some odd periodic function ε , (3.11) the former being a modular form of weight 1/2 and the latter a cusp form of weight 3/2. A theorem of Serre and Stark says that in fact every modular form of weight 1/2 is a linear combination of form of the type (3.10), a simple example being the identity η(τ) := q1/24 ∞ Y n=1 (1 −qn) = ∞ X n=1 χ12(n) qn2/24 , (3.12) proved by Euler for the so-called Dedekind eta function η(t) = ∆(τ)1/24. Here χ12 is the function of period 12 deﬁned by χ12(n) =    +1 if n ≡±1 (mod 12) −1 if n ≡±5 (mod 12) 0 if (n, 12) > 1 .
(3.13) Finally, we recall the deﬁnition of the Petersson scalar product. If f(τ) and g(τ) are two modular forms of the same weight k and the same “multiplier system” on some subgroup Γ of ﬁnite index of SL2(Z) (this means that the quotient f/g is invariant under Γ), and if either k < 1 or else at least one of f and g is a cusp form, then we can deﬁne the (normalized) Petersson scalar product of f and g by  f, g  = Z FΓ f(τ) g(τ) τ k 2 dµ(τ) Z FΓ dµ(τ)  dµ(τ) := dτ1dτ2 τ 2 2  , (3.14) where FΓ is a fundamental domain for Γ.
This deﬁnition is independent of the choice of the subgroup Γ and the fundamental domain FΓ. By the Rankin-Selberg formula (see, for example, [127]), we have that if f = P λ aλqλ and g = P λ bλqλ (where λ ≥0 may have a denominator), then (f, g) = Γ(k) (4π)k Ress=k  X λ>0 aλ bλ λs  , (3.15) a formula that will be used later. For instance, for f = g = η we have k = 1/2 and P λ aλbλλ−s = 24s(1 −2−2s)(1 −3−2s) ζ(2s), and hence (η, η) = 1/ √ 6.
– 20 – 3.2 Quantum black holes and modular forms Modular forms occur naturally in the context of counting the Dabholkar-Harvey (DH) states [39, 32], which are states in the string Hilbert space that are dual to perturbative BPS states.
The spacetime helicity supertrace counting the degeneracies reduces to the partition function of a chiral conformal ﬁeld theory on a genus-one worldsheet. The τ parameter above becomes the modular parameter of the genus one Riemann surface. The degeneracies are given by the Fourier coeﬃcients of the partition function.
A well-known simple example is the partition function Z(τ) which counts the half-BPS DH states for the Type-II compactiﬁcation on K3 × T 2 considered here. In the notation of (2.3) these states have zero magnetic charge M = 0, but nonzero electric charge N with the T-duality invariant N 2 = 2n, which can be realized for example by setting Q1 = Q5 = l = 0 in (2.15). They are thus purely electric and perturbative in the heterotic frame6. The partition function is given by the partition function of the chiral conformal ﬁeld theory of 24 left-moving transverse bosons of the heterotic string. The Hilbert space H of this theory is a unitary Fock space representation of the commutation algebra [ain, a† jm] = δij δn+m,0 (i, j = 1, . . . , 24 , n, m = 1, 2, . . . , ∞) (3.16) of harmonic modes of oscillations of the string in 24 diﬀerent directions. The Hamiltonian is H = 24 X i=1 n a† in ain −1 , (3.17) and the partition function is Z(τ) = TrH(qH) .
(3.18) This can be readily evaluated since each oscillator mode of energy n contributes to the trace 1 + qn + q2n + . . . = 1 1 −qn .
(3.19) The partition function then becomes Z(τ) = 1 ∆(τ) , (3.20) where ∆is the cusp form (3.6). Since ∆has a simple zero at q = 0, the partition function itself has a pole at q = 0, but has no other poles in H. Hence, Z(τ) is a weakly holomorphic 6Not all DH states are half-BPS. For example, the states that are perturbative in the Type-II frame corre-spond to a Type-II string winding and carrying momentum along a cycle in T 2. For such states both M and N are nonzero and nonparallel, and hence the state is quarter- BPS.
– 21 – modular form of weight −12. This property is essential in the present physical context since it determines the asymptotic growth of the Fourier coeﬃcients.
The degeneracy d(n) of the state with electric charge N depends only on the T-duality invariant integer n and is given by Z(τ) = ∞ X n=−1 d(n) qn .
(3.21) For the Fourier integral d(n) = Z C e−2πiτnZ(τ)dτ , (3.22) one can choose the contour C in H to be 0 ≤Re(τ) < 1 , (3.23) for a ﬁxed imaginary part Im(τ). Since the partition function has no poles in H except at q = 0, smooth deformations of the contour do not change the Fourier coeﬃcients and consequently the degeneracies d(n) are uniquely determined from the partition function. This reﬂects the fact that the half-BPS states are immortal and do not decay anywhere in the moduli space. As a result, there is no wall crossing phenomenon, and no jumps in the degeneracy.
In number theory, the partition function above is well-known in the context of the problem of partitions of integers. We can therefore identify d(n) = p24(n + 1) (n ≥0) .
(3.24) where p24(I) is the number of colored partitions of a positive integer I using integers of 24 diﬀerent colors.
These states have a dual description in the Type-II frame where they can be viewed as bound states of Q1 number of D1-branes and Q5 number of D5-branes with M 2/2 = Q1Q5 ≡m. This corresponds to setting n = ˜ K = l = 0 in (2.15). In this description, the number of such bound states d(m) equals the orbifold Euler character χ(Symm+1(K3)) of the symmetric product of (m + 1) copies of K3-surface [120]. The generating function for the orbifold Euler character ˆ Z(σ) = ∞ X m=−1 χ(Symm+1(K3)) pm  p := e2πiσ (3.25) can be evaluated [65] to obtain ˆ Z(σ) = 1 ∆(σ) .
(3.26) Duality requires that the number of immortal BPS-states of a given charge must equal the number of BPS-states with the dual charge. The equality of the two partition functions (3.20) – 22 – and (3.26) coming from two very diﬀerent counting problems is consistent with this expectation.
This fact was indeed one of the early indications of a possible duality between heterotic and Type-II strings [120].
The DH-states correspond to the microstates of a small black hole [103, 28, 40] for large n.
The macroscopic entropy S(n) of these black holes should equal the asymptotic growth of the degeneracy by the Boltzmann relation S(n) = log d(n); n ≫1 .
(3.27) In the present context, the macroscopic entropy can be evaluated from the supergravity solution of small black holes [81, 84, 83, 82, 28, 40]. The asymptotic growth of the microscopic degeneracy can be evaluated using the Hardy-Ramanujan expansion (Cardy formula). There is a beautiful agreement between the two results [28, 79] S(n) = log d(n) ∼4π√n n ≫1 .
(3.28) Given the growth properties of the Fourier coeﬃcients mentioned above, it is clear that, for a black hole whose entropy scales as a power of n and not as log(n), the partition function counting its microstates can be only weakly holomorphic and not holomorphic.
These considerations generalize in a straightforward way to congruence subgroups of SL(2, Z) which are relevant for counting the DH-states in various orbifold compactiﬁcations with N = 4 or N = 2 supersymmetry [29, 104, 30].
4. Jacobi forms 4.1 Basic deﬁnitions Consider a holomorphic function ϕ(τ, z) from H × C to C which is “modular in τ and elliptic in z” in the sense that it transforms under the modular group as ϕ aτ + b cτ + d, z cτ + d  = (cτ + d)k e 2πimcz2 cτ+d ϕ(τ, z) ∀  a b c d  ∈SL(2; Z) (4.1) and under the translations of z by Zτ + Z as ϕ(τ, z + λτ + µ) = e−2πim(λ2τ+2λz)ϕ(τ, z) ∀ λ, µ ∈Z , (4.2) where k is an integer and m is a positive integer.
These equations include the periodicities ϕ(τ + 1, z) = ϕ(τ, z) and ϕ(τ, z + 1) = ϕ(τ, z), so ϕ has a Fourier expansion ϕ(τ, z) = X n,r c(n, r) qn yr , (q := e2πiτ, y := e2πiz) .
(4.3) – 23 – Equation (4.2) is then equivalent to the periodicity property c(n, r) = C(4nm −r2, r) , where C(∆, r) depends only on r (mod 2m) .
(4.4) (We will sometimes denote c(n, r) and C(∆, r) by cϕ(n, r) and Cϕ(∆, r) or by c(ϕ; n, r) and C(ϕ ; ∆, r) when this is required for emphasis or clarity.) The function ϕ(τ, z) is called a holomorphic Jacobi form (or simply a Jacobi form) of weight k and index m if the coeﬃcients C(∆, r) vanish for ∆< 0, i.e. if c(n, r) = 0 unless 4mn ≥r2 .
(4.5) It is called a Jacobi cusp form if it satisﬁes the stronger condition that C(∆, r) vanishes unless ∆is strictly positive, i.e.
c(n, r) = 0 unless 4mn > r2 , (4.6) and it is called a weak Jacobi form if it satisﬁes the weaker condition c(n, r) = 0 unless n ≥0 (4.7) rather than (4.5), whereas a merely weakly holomorphic Jacobi form satisﬁes only the yet weaker condition that c(n, r) = 0 unless n ≥n0 for some possibly negative integer n0 (or equivalently C(∆, r) = 0 unless ∆≥∆0 for some possibly negative integer ∆0). The space of all holomorphic (resp. cuspidal, weak, or weakly holomorphic) Jacobi forms of weight k and index m will be denoted by Jk,m (resp. J0 k,m, e Jk,m, or e J !
k,m).
Finally, the quantity ∆= 4mn −r2, which by virtue of the above discussion is the crucial invariant of a monomial qnyr occurring in the Fourier expansion of ϕ, will be referred to as its discriminant. (It would be mathematically more correct to use this word for the quantity −∆, but ∆is usually positive and it is more convenient to work with positive numbers.) 4.2 Theta expansion and Taylor expansion A Jacobi form has two important representations, the theta expansion and the Taylor expansion.
In this subsection, we explain both of these and the relation between them.
If ϕ(τ, z) is a Jacobi form, then the transformation property (4.2) implies its Fourier ex-pansion with respect to z has the form ϕ(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z qℓ2/4m hℓ(τ) e2πiℓz (4.8) where hℓ(τ) is periodic in ℓwith period 2m. In terms of the coeﬃcients (4.4) we have hℓ(τ) = X ∆ C(∆, ℓ) q∆/4m (ℓ∈Z/2mZ) .
(4.9) – 24 – Because of the periodicity property, equation (4.8) can be rewritten in the form ϕ(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z/2mZ hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) , (4.10) where ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) denotes the standard index m theta function ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) := X r ∈Z r ≡ℓ(mod 2m) qr2/4m yr = X n ∈Z q(ℓ+2mn)2/4m yℓ+2mn (4.11) (which is a Jacobi form of weight 1 2 and index m on some subgroup of SL(2, Z)). This is the theta expansion of ϕ. The coeﬃciens hℓ(τ) are modular forms of weight k −1 2 and are weakly holomorphic, holomorphic or cuspidal if ϕ is a weak Jacobi form, a Jacobi form or a Jacobi cusp form, respectively. More precisely, the vector h := (h1, . . . , h2m) transforms like a modular form of weight k −1 2 under SL(2, Z).
The theta decomposition (4.10) leads to the deﬁnition of a diﬀerential operator on Jacobi forms as follows. Let Lm = 4m 2πi ∂ ∂τ − 1 (2πi)2 ∂2 ∂z2 be the index m heat operator, which sends ϕ = P c(n, r)qnyr to P(4nm−r2)c(n, r)qnyr. Here the Fourier coeﬃcients have the same periodicity property (4.4) as for ϕ, so Lmϕ has the same elliptic transformation properties as a Jacobi form of index m. Moreover, since Lm annihilates all the ϑm,ℓ, we have Lm(P hℓϑm,ℓ) = 4m P h′ ℓϑm,ℓ, so the modiﬁed heat operator Lk,m = Lm −m(k −1 2) 3 E2 : X ℓ hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) 7→4m X ℓ ∂RS k−1 2hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) , (4.12) where ∂RS ∗ is the Ramanujan-Serre derivative deﬁned in (3.7), sends Jk,m to Jk+2,m (and also e Jk,m to e Jk+2,m and J !
k,m to J !
k+2,m). These operators will be used later.
A Jacobi form ϕ ∈e Jk,m also has a Taylor expansion in z which for k even takes the form ϕ(τ, z) = ξ0(τ) + ξ1(τ) 2 + mξ′ 0(τ) k  (2πiz)2 + ξ2(τ) 24 + mξ′ 1(τ) 2 (k + 2) + m2ξ ′′ 0(τ) 2k(k + 1)  (2πiz)4+· · · (4.13) with ξν ∈Mk+2ν(SL(2, Z)) and the prime denotes 1 2πi d dτ as before. In terms of the Fourier coeﬃcients of ϕ, the modular form ξν is given by (k + 2ν −2)!
(k + ν −2)! ξν(τ) = ∞ X n=0 X r Pν,k(nm, r2)c(n, r) !
qn , (4.14) – 25 – where Pν,k is a homogeneous polynomial of degree ν in r2 and n with coeﬃcients depending on k and m, the ﬁrst few being P0,k = 1 , P1,k = kr2 −2nm , P2,k = (k + 1)(k + 2)r4 −12(k + 1)r2mn + 12m2n2 .
(4.15) The Jacobi form ϕ is determined by the ﬁrst m+1 coeﬃcients ξν, and the map ϕ 7→(ξ0, . . . , ξm) is an isomorphism from e Jk,m to Mk ⊕Mk+2 ⊕· · ·⊕Mk+2m. For k odd, the story is similar except that (4.13) must be replaced by ϕ(τ, z) = ξ0(τ) (2πiz) + ξ1(τ) 6 + mξ′ 0(τ) k + 2  (2πiz)3 + · · · (4.16) with ξν ∈Mk+2ν+1(SL(2, Z)), and the map ϕ 7→(ξ0, . . . , ξm−2) gives an isomorphism from e Jk,m to Mk+1 ⊕Mk+3 ⊕· · · ⊕Mk+2m−3.
We also observe that even if ϕ is weak, so that the individual coeﬃcients c(n, r) grow like C √ 4nm−r2, the coeﬃcients P r Pν,k(nm, r2) c(n, r) of ξν still have only polynomial growth. We thus have the following descriptions (analogous to those given for classical modular forms in §3.1) of holomorphic and weak Jacobi forms in terms of their asymptotic properties: Holomorphic Jacobi ⇐ ⇒ c(n, r) = 0 for 4mn −r2 < 0 ⇐ ⇒ the function qmα2ϕ(τ, ατ + β) (which is a modular form of weight k and some level) is bounded as τ2 →∞for every α, β ∈Q ⇐ ⇒ all hj(τ) in (4.10) are bounded as τ2 →∞ ⇐ ⇒ c(n, r) have polynomial growth.
Weak Jacobi ⇐ ⇒ c(n, r) = 0 for n < 0 ⇐ ⇒ ϕ(τ, ατ + β) is bounded as τ2 →∞for any ﬁxed z ∈C ⇐ ⇒ all hj(τ) = O(q−j2/4m) as τ2 →∞ ⇐ ⇒ P r Pν,k(nm, r2)c(n, r) have polynomial growth.
Finally, the relation between the Taylor expansion (4.13) of a Jacobi form and its theta expansion (4.10) is given by ξν(τ) = (4m)ν k + 2ν −2 ν −1 X ℓ(mod 2m)  hℓ(τ), ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ)  ν , (4.17) where [ , ]ν = [ , ] (k−1 2 , 1 2 ) ν denotes the Rankin-Cohen bracket (which, as we mentioned above, also works in half-integral weight), and ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) = ϑm,ℓ(τ, 0) (Thetanullwerte). There is a similar – 26 – formula in the odd case, but with ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) replaced by ϑ1 m,ℓ(τ) = 1 2πi ∂ ∂zϑm,ℓ(τ, z) z=0 = X r≡ℓ(mod 2m) r qr2/4m .
(4.18) 4.3 Example: Jacobi forms of index 1 If m = 1, (4.4) reduces to c(n, r) = C(4n −r2) where C(∆) is a function of a single argument, because 4n −r2 determines the value of r (mod 2). So any ϕ ∈Jweak k,1 has an expansion of the form ϕ(τ, z) = X n,r∈Z C(4n −r2) qn yr .
(4.19) It also follows that k must be even, since in general, C(∆, −r) = (−1)kC(∆, r).
One has the isomorphisms Jk,1 ∼ = Mk ⊕Sk+2 and Jweak k,1 ∼ = Mk ⊕Mk+2. If ϕ ∈Jweak k,1 with an expansion as in (4.19), then ϕ(τ, 0) = ∞ X n=0 a(n) qn , 1 2(2πi)2ϕ′′(τ, 0) = ∞ X n=0 b(n) qn , (4.20) where a(n) = X r∈Z C(4n −r2) , b(n) = X r>0 r2 C(4n −r2) , (4.21) and the isomorphisms are given (if k > 0) by the map ϕ 7→(A, B) with A(τ) = X a(n) qn ∈Mk , B(τ) = X kb(n) −na(n)  qn ∈Mk+2 .
(4.22) For Jk,1 one also has the isomorphism Jk,1 ∼ = M + k−1 2 (Γ0(4)) given by ϕ(τ, z) ↔g(τ) = X ∆≥0 ∆≡0, 3 mod4 C(∆) q∆.
(4.23) We have four particularly interesting examples ϕk,1 ϕk,1(τ, z) = X n, r∈Z Ck(4n −r2) qn yr , k = −2, 0, 10, 12 , (4.24) which have the properties (deﬁning them uniquely up to multiplication by scalars) • ϕ10,1 and ϕ12,1 are the two index 1 Jacobi cusp forms of smallest weight; • ϕ−2,1 and ϕ0,1 are the unique weak Jacobi forms of index 1 and weight ≤0; – 27 – • ϕ−2,1 and ϕ0,1 generate the ring of weak Jacobi forms of even weight freely over the ring of modular forms of level 1, so that Jweak k,m = m M j=0 Mk+2j (SL(2, Z)) · ϕj −2,1 ϕm−j 0,1 (k even) ; (4.25) • ϕ−2,1 = ϕ10,1/∆, ϕ0,1 = ϕ12,1/∆, and the quotient ϕ0,1/ϕ−2,1 = ϕ12,1/ϕ10,1 is a multiple of the Weierstrass ℘function.
The Fourier coeﬃcients of these functions can be computed from the above recursions, since the pairs (A, B) for ϕ = ϕ−2,1, ϕ0,1, ϕ10,1 and ϕ12,1 are proportional to (0, 1), (1, 0), (0, ∆) and (∆, 0), respectively7. The results for the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients are given in Table 4.3 below. In particular, the Fourier expansions of ϕ−2,1 and ϕ0,1 begin ϕ−2,1 = (y −1)2 y −2 (y −1)4 y2 q + (y −1)4(y2 −8y + 1) y3 q2 + · · · , (4.26) ϕ0,1 = y2 + 10y + 1 y + 2(y −1)2 (5y2 −22y + 5) y2 q + · · · .
(4.27) k Ck(−1) Ck(0) Ck(3) Ck(4) Ck(7) Ck(8) Ck(11) Ck(12) Ck(15) −2 1 −2 8 −12 39 −56 152 −208 513 0 1 10 −64 108 −513 808 −2752 4016 −11775 10 0 0 1 −2 −16 36 99 −272 −240 12 0 0 1 10 −88 −132 1275 736 −8040 Table 1: Some Fourier coeﬃcients The functions ϕk,1 (k = 10, 0, −2) can be expressed in terms of the Dedekind eta function (3.12) and the Jacobi theta functions ϑ1, ϑ2, ϑ3, ϑ4 by the formlas ϕ10,1(τ, z) = η18(τ) ϑ2 1(τ, z) , (4.28) ϕ−2,1(τ, z) = ϑ2 1(τ, z) η6(τ) = ϕ10,1(τ, z) ∆(τ) .
(4.29) ϕ0,1(τ, z) = 4 ϑ2(τ, z)2 ϑ2(τ)2 + ϑ3(τ, z)2 ϑ3(τ)2 + ϑ4(τ, z)2 ϑ4(τ)2  , (4.30) Finally, we say a few words about Jacobi forms of odd weight. Such a form cannot have index 1, as we saw. In index 2, the isomorphisms Jk,2 ∼ = Sk+1 and Jweak k,2 ∼ = Mk+1 show that the 7For k = 0, the second formula in (4.22) must be modiﬁed, and the function P b(n)qn for ϕ0,1 is in fact E2(τ).
– 28 – ﬁrst examples of holomorphic and weak Jacobi forms occur in weights 11 and −1, respectively, and are related by ϕ−1,2 = ϕ11,2/∆. The function ϕ−1,2 is given explicitly by ϕ−1,2(τ, z) = ϑ1(τ, 2z) η3(τ) , (4.31) with Fourier expansion beginning ϕ−1,2 = y2 −1 y −(y2 −1)3 y3 q −3 (y2 −1)3 y3 q2 + · · · , (4.32) and its square is related to the index 1 Jacobi forms deﬁned above by 432 ϕ2 −1,2 = ϕ−2,1  ϕ3 0,1 −3 E4 ϕ2 −2,1 ϕ0,1 + 2 E6 ϕ3 −2,1  .
(4.33) (In fact, ϕ−1,2/ϕ2 −2,1 is a multiple of ℘′(τ, z) and this equation, divided by ϕ4 −2,1, is just the usual equation expressing ℘′ 2 as a cubic polynomial in ℘.) It is convenient to introduce abbreviations A = ϕ−2,1 , B = ϕ0,1 , C = ϕ−1,2 .
(4.34) With these notations, the structure of the full bigraded ring of weak Jacobi forms is given by Jweak ∗,∗ = C[E4, E6, A, B, C]  (432C2 −AB3 + 3E4A3B −2E6A4) .
(4.35) 4.4 Hecke-like operators In [57] Hecke operators Tℓacting on Jk,m were introduced, but also various “Hecke-like” oper-ators, again deﬁned by the action of certain combinations of elements of GL(2, Q) ⋊Q2, which send Jacobi forms to Jacobi forms, but now possibly changing the index. We describe these operators here. This subsection is more technical than the preceding three, but will be essential later.
The ﬁrst is the very simple operator Us (s ≥1) which sends ϕ(τ, z) to ϕ(τ, sz), i.e., Us : X n,r c(n, r) qn yr 7→ X n,r c(n, r) qn ysr , (4.36) This operator maps Jk,m to Jk,s2m.
The second operator, Vk,t (t ≥1), sends Jk,m to Jk,tm. It is given in terms of its action on Fourier coeﬃcients by c(ϕ|Vk,t ; n, r) = X d|(n,r,t) dk−1c  ϕ ; nt d2 , r d  , C(ϕ|Vk,t ; ∆, r) = X d|( r2+∆ 4mt ,r,t) dk−1C  ϕ ; ∆ d2, r d  .
(4.37) – 29 – In §9, we will also need the modiﬁed operator V(m) k,t : Jk,m 7→Jk,tm deﬁned by V(m) k,t = X s2|t (s,m)=1 µ(s) sk−1 Vk,t/s2 Us , (4.38) so that, for instance, V(m) k,t = Vk,t if t is square-free, but V(m) k,4 = Vk,4 −2k−1U2 if m is odd.
Next, for each positive integer m1 with m1∥m (this means that m = m1m2 with m1 and m2 coprime) we have an involution Wm1 on Jk,m, which we will call an Atkin-Lehner involution,8 that is deﬁned in terms of the theta expansion of Jacobi forms by Wm1 : X ℓ(mod 2m) hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) 7→ X ℓ(mod 2m) hℓ∗(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) (4.39) (or equivalently by C(∆, r) 7→C(∆, r∗)), where the involution ℓ7→ℓ∗on Z/2mZ is deﬁned by ℓ∗≡−ℓ(mod 2m1), ℓ∗≡+ℓ(mod 2m2) .
(4.40) These operators commute and satisfy Wm/m1 = (−1)kWm1, so that we get an eigenspace de-composition Jk,m = M ε ε ε=(ε1,...,εt) ∈{±1}t ε1···εt = (−1)k Jε ε ε k,m , (4.41) where m = pr1 1 · · · prt t is the prime power decomposition of m and εi is the eigenvalue of Wpri i .
One can also introduce the “p-adic Atkin-Lehner involution” Wp∞, which acts on any Jk,m as Wpν where pν||m. (In particular, it acts as the identity if p ∤m.) This operator simply changes the second index r in C(∆, r) to r∗, where r is equal to the negative of r∗p-adically and to r∗p′-adically for any p′ ̸= p. In particular, Wp∞commutes with all Us, Vk,t, and Vm k,t.
We now describe a further Hecke-like operator, which was not given in [57] but is mentioned brieﬂy in [115], p. 139, and which we will also need in the sequel. If t is a positive integer whose square divides m, then we deﬁne ut : Jk,m − →Jk,m/t2 by ut : X n,r c(n, r) qn yr 7→ X n,r  X a (mod t) c  n + ar + m t2 a2, tr + 2ma t   qn yr (4.42) or equivalently by Cϕ|ut(∆, ℓ(mod 2m/t2)) = X r (mod 2m/t) r≡ℓ(mod 2m/t2) Cϕ(∆t2, rt (mod 2m)) .
(4.43) 8This terminology was not used in [57], where these involutions were introduced, but is justiﬁed by the results of [115] where it is shown that they correspond in a precise sense to the Atkin-Lehner involutions on the space of modular forms of weight 2k −2 and level m.
– 30 – It is easily checked that this map does indeed send Jacobi forms to Jacobi forms of the index stated, and that for any integers m, t > 0, the composite map Jk,m/t2 Ut − →Jk,m ut − →Jk,m/t2 is simply multiplication by t (because, if ϕ = ϕ1 | Ut with ϕ1 of index m/t2, then each term on the right of (4.43) equals Cϕ1(∆, ℓ)). It follows that we have Jk,m = M t2|m Jprim k, m t2 | Ut , (4.44) where Jprim k,m = \ t2|m t>1 ker  Jk,m ut − →Jk,m/t2 = \ p2|m p prime ker  Jk,m up − →Jk,m/p2 (4.45) (the equivalence of the two deﬁnitions follows because ut ut′ = utt′ for any t, t′), with the projection map πprim : Jk,m 7→Jprim k,m onto the ﬁrst factor in (4.44) given by πprim(ϕ) = X t2|m µ(t) t ϕ|ut |Ut .
(4.46) We will sometimes ﬁnd it useful to work, not with the space of Jacobi forms, but with the larger space of holomorphic functions on H × C that obey the elliptic transformation law (4.2) of Jacobi forms, but are not required to obey the modular transformation property (4.1).
We shall call such functions elliptic forms.
(The word Jacobi-like forms has been used in the literature to denote functions which, conversely, satisfy (4.1) but not (4.2).) Any elliptic form has a Fourier expansion as in (4.3) with the periodicity condition (4.4). We will denote by Em, E0 m, e Em the spaces of all elliptic forms of index m satisfying the growth conditions (4.5), (4.6), and (4.7), respectively, and we will call them holomorphic, cuspidal, and weak respectively.
We also denote by E±,m, E0 ±,m, e E±,m the (±1)−eigenspaces of theta functions under the involution ϕ(τ, z) 7→ϕ(τ, −z), i.e., those functions whose Fourier coeﬃcients c(n, r) satisfy the parity condition c(n, −r) = ±c(n, r). Because any Jacobi form of weight k satisﬁes this parity condition with ±1 = (−1)k (by (4.1) applied to −12), we have Jk,m ⊂E±,m , J0 k,m ⊂E0 ±,m , e Jk,m ⊂e E±,m  (−1)k = ±1  .
(4.47) It is now clear from the deﬁnitions above that all of the Hecke-like operators Vt, Ut, Wm1 for (m1, m/m1) = 1 and ut for t2|m deﬁned in this section extend from the space of Jacobi forms to the space of elliptic forms, and that the decompositions (4.41) and (4.44) remain true if we replace all the Jks by E+s.
Finally, we should warn the reader explicitly that, although the operators Ut and Vt also act on the spaces e Jk,∗and e E±,∗of weak Jacobi or weak elliptic forms, the operators Wm1 and ut do not: the condition (4.7) is equivalent to saying that C(∆, ℓ) for |ℓ| ≤m vanishes whenever ∆< – 31 – −ℓ2, and this condition is preserved neither under the permutation ℓ(mod 2m) 7→ℓ∗(mod 2m) deﬁning Wm1, nor by the summation conditions in (4.43).
As a concrete example, the 7-dimensional space e J2,6 contains a 6-dimensional subspace of forms invariant under the involution W2, but no anti-invariant form, and its image under the projection operator π− 2 = 1 2(1 −W2) to anti-invariant forms is the 1-dimensional space spanned by ϕ− 2,6(τ, z) = j′(τ) ϑ1(τ, 4z) ϑ1(τ, 2z) = X n, r∈Z χ12(r) C2,6(24n −r2) qn yr , (4.48) with ∆ ≤−49 −25 −1 23 47 71 · · · C2,6(∆) 0 −1 −1 196882 43184401 2636281193 · · · , which is a weakly holomorphic but not a weak Jacobi form. (Speciﬁcally, for any ϕ ∈e J2,6 we have π− 2 (ϕ) = 6 cϕ(0, 5) ϕ− 2,6 .) 4.5 Quantum black holes and Jacobi forms Jacobi forms usually arise in string theory as elliptic genera of two-dimensional superconformal ﬁeld theories (SCFT) with (2, 2) or more worldsheet supersymmetry9. We denote the super-conformal ﬁeld theory by σ(M) when it corresponds to a sigma model with a target manifold M. Let H be the Hamiltonian in the Ramond sector, and J be the left-moving U(1) R-charge.
The elliptic genus χ(τ, z; M) is then deﬁned as [123, 3, 97] a trace over the Hilbert space HR in the Ramond sector χ(τ, z; M) = TrHR  (−1)FqHyJ , (4.49) where F is the fermion number.
An elliptic genus so deﬁned satisﬁes the modular transformation property (4.1) as a con-sequence of modular invariance of the path integral. Similarly, it satisﬁes the elliptic trans-formation property (4.2) as a consequence of spectral ﬂow. Furthermore, in a unitary SCFT, the positivity of the Hamiltonian implies that the elliptic genus is a weak Jacobi form. The decomposition (4.10) follows from bosonizing the U(1) current in the standard way so that the contribution to the trace from the momentum modes of the boson can be separated into the theta function (4.11). See, for example, [77, 93] for a discussion. This notion of the elliptic genus can be generalized to a (0, 2) theory using a left-moving U(1) charge J which may not be an R- charge. In this case spectral ﬂow is imposed as an additional constraint and follows from gauge invariance under large gauge transformations [44, 61, 80, 48].
A particularly useful example in the present context is σ(K3), which is a (4, 4) SCFT whose target space is a K3 surface. The elliptic genus is a topological invariant and is independent of 9An SCFT with (r, s) supersymmetries has r left-moving and s right-moving supersymmetries.
– 32 – the moduli of the K3. Hence, it can be computed at some convenient point in the K3 moduli space, for example, at the orbifold point where the K3 is the Kummer surface. At this point, the σ(K3) SCFT can be regarded as a Z2 orbifold of the σ(T 4) SCFT, which is an SCFT with a torus T 4 as the target space. A simple computation using standard techniques of orbifold conformal ﬁeld theory [43, 63] yields χ(τ, z; K3) = 2 ϕ0,1(τ, z) = 2 X C0(4n −l2) qn yl .
(4.50) Note that for z = 0, the trace (4.49) reduces to the Witten index of the SCFT and correspond-ingly the elliptic genus reduces to the Euler character of the target space manifold. In our case, one can readily verify from (4.50) and (4.30) that χ(τ, 0; K3) equals 24, which is the Euler character of K3.
A well-known physical application of Jacobi forms is in the context of the ﬁve-dimensional Strominger-Vafa black hole[118], which is a bound state of Q1 D1-branes, Q5 D5-branes, n units of momentum and l units of ﬁve-dimensional angular momentum [12]. The degeneracies dm(n, l) of such black holes depend only on m = Q1Q5. They are given by the Fourier coeﬃcients c(n, l) of the elliptic genus χ(τ, z; Symm+1(K3)) of symmetric product of (m+1) copies of K3-surface.
Let us denote the generating function for the elliptic genera of symmetric products of K3 by b Z(σ, τ, z) := ∞ X m=−1 χ(τ, z; Symm+1(K3)) pm (4.51) where χm(τ, z) is the elliptic genus of Symm(K3). A standard orbifold computation [50] gives b Z(σ, τ, z) = 1 p Y r>0, s≥0, t 1 (1 −qsytpr)2C0(rs,t) (4.52) in terms of the Fourier coeﬃcients 2Co of the elliptic genus of a single copy of K3.
For z = 0, it can be checked that, as expected, the generating function (4.52) for elliptic genera reduces to the generating function (3.26) for Euler characters b Z(σ, τ, 0) = ˆ Z(σ) = 1 ∆(σ) .
(4.53) 5. Siegel modular forms 5.1 Deﬁnitions and examples of Siegel modular forms Let Sp(2, Z) be the group of (4 × 4) matrices g with integer entries satisfying gJgt = J where J ≡  0 −I2 I2 0  (5.1) – 33 – is the symplectic form. We can write the element g in block form as  A B C D  , (5.2) where A, B, C, D are all (2 × 2) matrices with integer entries. Then the condition gJgt = J implies ABt = BAt, CDt = DCt, ADt −BCt = 1 , (5.3) Let H2 be the (genus two) Siegel upper half plane, deﬁned as the set of (2 × 2) symmetric matrix Ωwith complex entries Ω=  τ z z σ  (5.4) satisfying Im(τ) > 0, Im(σ) > 0, det(Im(Ω)) > 0 .
(5.5) An element g ∈Sp(2, Z) of the form (5.2) has a natural action on H2 under which it is stable: Ω→(AΩ+ B)(CΩ+ D)−1.
(5.6) The matrix Ωcan be thought of as the period matrix of a genus two Riemann surface10 on which there is a natural symplectic action of Sp(2, Z).
A Siegel form F(Ω) of weight k is a holomorphic function H2 →C satisfying F  (AΩ+ B)(CΩ+ D)−1 = det(CΩ+ D)k F(Ω) .
(5.7) A Siegel modular form can be written in terms of its Fourier series F(Ω) = X n, r, m ∈Z r2≤4mn a(n, r, m) qn yr pm .
(5.8) If one writes this as F(Ω) = ∞ X m=0 ϕF m(τ, z) pm (5.9) with ϕF m(τ, z) = X n, r a(n, r, m) qn yr , (5.10) then each ϕF m(m ≥0) is a Jacobi form of weight k and index m.
10See [59, 41, 9] for a discussion of the connection with genus-two Riemann surfaces.
– 34 – An important special class of Siegel forms were studied by Maass which he called the Spezialschar. They have the property that a(n, r, m) depends only on the discriminant 4mn−r2 if (n, r, m) are coprime, and more generally a(n, r, m) = X d|(n,r,m), d>0 dk−1C 4mn −r2 d2  (5.11) for some coeﬃcients C(N). Specializing to m = 1, we can see that these numbers are simply the coeﬃcients associated via (4.19) to the Jacobi form ϕ = ϕF 1 ∈Jk,1, and that (5.11) says precisely that the other Fourier-Jacobi coeﬃcients of F are given by ϕF m = ϕF 1|Vm with Vm as in (4.37).
Conversely, if ϕ is any Jacobi form of weight k and index 1 with Fourier expansion (4.19), then the function F(Ω) deﬁned by (5.8) and (5.11) or by F(Ω) = P∞ m=0  ϕ|Vm  (τ, z) pm is a Siegel modular form of weight k with ϕF 1 = ϕ. The resulting map from Jk,1 to the Spezialschar is called the Saito-Kurokawa lift or additive lift since it naturally gives the sum representation of a Siegel form using the Fourier coeﬃcients of a Jacobi form as the input. (More information about the additive lift can be found in [57].) The example of interest to us is the Igusa cusp form Φ10 (the unique cusp form of weight 10) which is the Saito-Kurokawa lift of the Jacobi form ϕ10,1 introduced earlier, so that Φ10(Ω) = ∞ X m=1  ϕ10,1|Vm  (τ, z) pm = X n, r, m a10(n, r, m) qn yr pm , (5.12) where a10 is deﬁned by (5.11) with k = 10 in terms of the coeﬃcients C10(d) given in Table 4.3.
A Siegel modular form sometimes also admits a product representation, and can be obtained as Borcherds lift or multiplicative lift of a weak Jacobi form of weight zero and index one. This procedure is in a sense an exponentiation of the additive lift and naturally results in the product representation of the Siegel form using the Fourier coeﬃcients of a Jacobi form as the input.
Several examples of Siegel forms that admit product representation are known but at present there is no general theory to determine under what conditions a given Siegel form admits a product representation.
For the Igusa cusp form Φ10, a product representation does exist. It was obtained by Grit-senko and Nikulin [67, 68] as a multiplicative lift of the elliptic genus χ(τ, z; K3) = 2ϕ0,1(τ, z) and is given by Φ10(Ω) = qyp Y (r,s,t)>0  1 −qsytpr2C0(4rs−t2), (5.13) in terms of C0 given by (4.30, 4.24). Here the notation (r, s, t) > 0 means that r, s, t ∈Z with either r > 0 or r = 0, s > 0, or r = s = 0, t < 0. In terms of the Vm, this can be rewritten in the form Φ10 = p ϕ10,1 exp  −2 P∞ m=1(ϕ0,1|Vm) pm .
– 35 – 5.2 Quantum black holes and Siegel modular forms Siegel forms occur naturally in the context of counting of quarter-BPS dyons. The partition function for these dyons depends on three (complexiﬁed) chemical potentials (σ, τ, z), conjugate to the three T-duality invariant integers (m, n, ℓ) respectively and is given by Z(Ω) = 1 Φ10(Ω) .
(5.14) The product representation of the Igusa form is particularly useful for the physics applica-tion because it is closely related to the generating function for the elliptic genera of symmetric products of K3 introduced earlier. This is a consequence of the fact that the multiplicative lift of the Igusa form is obtained starting with the elliptic genus of K3 as the input. Comparing the product representation for the Igusa form (5.13) with (4.52), we get the relation: Z(τ, z, σ) = 1 Φ10(τ, z, σ) = b Z(τ, z, σ) ϕ10,1(τ, z) .
(5.15) This relation to the elliptic genera of symmetric products of K3 has a deeper physical signiﬁcance based on what is known as the 4d-5d lift [60]. The main idea is to use the fact that the geometry of the Kaluza-Klein monopole in the charge conﬁguration (2.15) reduces to ﬁve-dimensional ﬂat Minkowski spacetime in the limit when the radius of the circle ˜ S1 goes to inﬁnity. In this limit, the charge l corresponding to the momentum around this circle gets identiﬁed with the angular momentum l in ﬁve dimensions. Our charge conﬁguration (2.15) then reduces essentially to the Strominger-Vafa black hole [118] with angular momentum [12] discussed in the previous subsection.
Assuming that the dyon partition function does not depend on the moduli, we thus essentially relate Z(Ω) to ˆ Z(Ω). The additional factor in (5.15) involving Φ10(σ, τ, z) comes from bound states of momentum n with the Kaluza-Klein monopole and from the center of mass motion of the Strominger-Vafa black hole in the Kaluza-Klein geometry [59, 42].
The Igusa cusp form has double zeros at z = 0 and its Sp(2, Z) images. The partition function is therefore a meromorphic Siegel form (5.7) of weight −10 with double poles at these divisors. This fact is responsible for much of the interesting physics of wall-crossings in this context as we explain in the next section.
Using (5.12) or (5.13), one can compute the coeﬃcients ψm in the Fourier-Jacobi expan-– 36 – sion (1.1). The ﬁrst few, multiplied by ∆and a suitable integer, are given by ∆ψ−1 = A−1 , ∆ψ0 = 2 A−1B , 4 ∆ψ1 = 9 A−1B2 + 3E4A , (5.16) 27 ∆ψ2 = 50 A−1B3 + 48E4AB + 10E6A2 , 384 ∆ψ3 = 475 A−1B4 + 886E4AB2 + 360E6A2B + 199E2 4A3 , 72 ∆ψ4 = 51 A−1B5 + 155E4AB3 + 93E6A2B2 + 102E2 4A3B + 31E4E6A4 .
(Here E4, E6, ∆are as in §3 and A = ϕ−2,1, B = ϕ0,1 as in §4.) The double zero of Φ10 at z = 0 is reﬂected by the denominator A in the A−1Bm+1 terms in these formulas. Note that, by (5.15), the right-hand side of (5.16) multiplied by A and divided by a suitable denominator are equal to the elliptic genus of symmetric products of a K3 surface. For example, χ(Sym4K3; τ, z) = 1 384  475 B4 + 886E4A2B2 + 360E6A3B + 199E2 4A4  .
(5.17) 6. Walls and contours Given the partition function (5.14), one can extract the black hole degeneracies from the Fourier coeﬃcients. The three quadratic T-duality invariants of a given dyonic state can be organized as a 2 × 2 symmetric matrix Λ = N ·N N ·M M ·N M ·M  = 2n ℓ ℓ2m  , (6.1) where the dot products are deﬁned using the O(22, 6; Z) invariant metric L. The matrix Ωin (5.14) and (5.4) can be viewed as the matrix of complex chemical potentials conjugate to the charge matrix Λ. The charge matrix Λ is manifestly T-duality invariant. Under an S-duality transformation (2.4), it transforms as Λ →γΛγt (6.2) There is a natural embedding of this physical S-duality group SL(2, Z) into Sp(2, Z):  A B C D  =  (γt)−1 0 0 γ  =      d −c 0 0 −b a 0 0 0 0 a b 0 0 c d     ∈Sp(2, Z) .
(6.3) – 37 – The embedding is chosen so that Ω→(γT)−1Ωγ−1 and Tr(Ω· Λ) in the Fourier integral is invariant. This choice of the embedding ensures that the physical degeneracies extracted from the Fourier integral are S-duality invariant if we appropriately transform the moduli at the same time as we explain below.
To specify the contours, it is useful to deﬁne the following moduli-dependent quantities.
One can deﬁne the matrix of right-moving T-duality invariants ΛR = QR · QR QR · PR PR · QR PR · PR  , (6.4) which depends both on the integral charge vectors N, M as well as the T-moduli µ. One can then deﬁne two matrices naturally associated to the S-moduli S = S1 + iS2 and the T-moduli µ respectively by S = 1 S2 |S|2 S1 S1 1  , T = ΛR | det(ΛR)| 1 2 .
(6.5) Both matrices are normalized to have unit determinant. In terms of them, we can construct the moduli-dependent ‘central charge matrix’ Z = | det(ΛR)| 1 4  S + T  , (6.6) whose determinant equals the BPS mass MQ,P = | det Z| .
(6.7) We deﬁne e Ω≡  σ −z −z τ  .
(6.8) This is related to Ωby an SL(2, Z) transformation ˜ Ω= b SΩb S−1 where b S =  0 1 −1 0  , (6.9) so that, under a general S-duality transformation γ, we have the transformation ˜ Ω→γe ΩγT as Ω→(γT)−1Ωγ−1.
With these deﬁnitions, Λ, ΛR, Z and ˜ Ωall transform as X →γXγT under an S-duality transformation (2.4) and are invariant under T-duality transformations. The moduli-dependent Fourier contour can then be speciﬁed in a duality-invariant fashion by[26] C = {Im(e Ω) = ε−1Z; 0 ≤Re(τ), Re(σ), Re(z) < 1}, (6.10) – 38 – where ε →0+. For a given set of charges, the contour depends on the moduli S, µ through the deﬁnition of the central charge vector (6.6). The degeneracies d(n, ℓ, m)|S,µ of states with the T-duality invariants (n, ℓ, m) at a given point (S, µ) in the moduli space are then given by11 d(n, ℓ, m)|S,µ= Z C e−iπTr(Ω·Λ) Z(Ω) d3Ω.
(6.11) This contour prescription thus speciﬁes how to extract the degeneracies from the partition function for a given set of charges and in any given region of the moduli space. In particular, it also completely summarizes all wall-crossings as one moves around in the moduli space for a ﬁxed set of charges. Even though the indexed partition function has the same functional form throughout the moduli space, the spectrum is moduli dependent because of the moduli depen-dence of the contours of Fourier integration and the pole structure of the partition function.
Since the degeneracies depend on the moduli only through the dependence of the contour C, moving around in the moduli space corresponds to deforming the Fourier contour. This does not change the degeneracy except when one encounters a pole of the partition function. Cross-ing a pole corresponds to crossing a wall in the moduli space. The moduli space is thus divided up into domains separated by “walls of marginal stability.” In each domain the degeneracy is constant but it jumps upon crossing a wall as one goes from one domain to the other. The jump in the degeneracy has a nice mathematical characterization. It is simply given by the residue at the pole that is crossed while deforming the Fourier contour in going from one domain to the other.
We now turn to the degeneracies of single-centered black holes. Given the T-duality in-variants Λ, a single centered black hole solution is known to exist in all regions of the moduli space as long as det(Λ) is large and positive. The moduli ﬁelds can take any values (λ∞, µ∞) at asymptotic inﬁnity far away from the black hole but the vary in the black hole geometry.
Because of the attractor phenomenon [58, 116], the moduli adjust themselves so that near the horizon of the black hole of charge Λ they get attracted to the values (λ∗(Λ), µ∗(Λ)) which are determined by the requirement that the central charge Z∗(Λ) evaluated using these moduli becomes proportional to Λ. These attractor values are independent of the asymptotic values and depend only on the charge of black hole. We call these moduli the attractor moduli. This enables us to deﬁne the attractor contour for a given charge Λ by ﬁxing the asymptotic moduli to the attractor values corresponding to this charge. In this case Z(λ∞, µ∞) = Z(λ∗(Λ), µ∗(Λ)) ∼Λ (6.12) and we have the attractor contour C∗= {Im(e Ω) = ε−1Λ; 0 ≤Re(τ), Re(σ), Re(z) < 1} (6.13) 11The physical degeneracies have an additional multiplicative factor of (−1)ℓ+1 which we omit here for sim-plicity of notation in later chapters.
– 39 – which depends only on the integral charges and not on the moduli. The signiﬁcance of the attractor moduli in our context stems from the fact if the asymptotic moduli are tuned to these values for given (n, ℓ, m), then only single-centered black hole solution exists. The degeneracies d∗(n, ℓ, m) obtained using the attractor contour d∗(n, ℓ, m) = Z C∗ e−iπTr(Ω·Λ) Z(Ω) d3Ω (6.14) are therefore expected to be the degeneracies of the immortal single-centered black holes.
7. Mock modular forms Mock modular forms are a relatively new class of modular objects, although individual examples had been known for some time. They were ﬁrst isolated explicitly by S. Zwegers in his thesis [130] as the explanation of the “mock theta functions” introduced by Ramanujan in his famous last letter to Hardy. An expository account of this work can be found in [129].
Ramanujan’s mock theta functions are examples of what we will call “pure” mock modular forms. By this we mean a holomorphic function in the upper half plane which transforms under modular transformations almost, but not quite, as a modular form. The non-modularity is of a very special nature and is governed by another holomorphic function called the shadow which is itself an ordinary modular form. We will describe this more precisely in §7.1 and give a number of examples. In §7.2, we introduce a notion of mock Jacobi forms (essentially, holomorphic functions of τ and z with theta expansions like that of usual Jacobi forms, but in which the coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) are mock modular forms) and show how all the examples given in the ﬁrst subsection occur naturally as pieces of mock Jacobi forms. Finally in §7.3 we deﬁne a more general notion of mock modular forms in which the shadow is replaced by a sum of products of holomorphic and anti-holomorphic modular forms. This has the advantage that there are now many examples of strongly holomorphic mock modular forms, whereas pure mock modular forms almost always have a negative power of q at at least one cusp, and also that almost all of the examples occurring naturally in number theory, algebraic geometry, or physics are of this more general “mixed” type, with the pure mock modular forms arising as quotients of mixed mock modular forms by eta products.
7.1 Pure mock modular forms We deﬁne a (weakly holomorphic) pure mock modular form of weight k ∈1 2Z as the ﬁrst member of a pair (h, g), where 1. h is a holomorphic function in I H with at most exponential growth at all cusps, – 40 – 2. the function g(τ), called the shadow of h, is a holomorphic12 modular form of weight 2 −k , and 3. the sum b h := h + g∗, called the completion of h, transforms like a holomorphic modular form of weight k, i.e. b h(τ)/θ(τ)2k is invariant under τ →γτ for all τ ∈I H and for all γ in some congruence subgroup of SL(2, Z).
Here g∗(τ), called the non-holomorphic Eichler integral, is a solution of the diﬀerential equation (4πτ2)k ∂g∗(τ) ∂τ = −2πi g(τ) .
(7.1) If g has the Fourier expansion g(τ) = P n≥0 bn qn, we ﬁx the choice of g∗by setting g∗(τ) = b0 (4πτ2)−k+1 k −1 + X n>0 nk−1 bn Γ(1 −k, 4πnτ2) q−n , (7.2) where τ2 = Im(τ) and Γ(1 −k, x) = R ∞ x t−k e−t dt denotes the incomplete gamma function, and where the ﬁrst term must be replaced by −b0 log(4πτ2) if k = 1. Note that the series in (7.2) converges despite the exponentially large factor q−n because Γ(1 −k, x) = O(x−ke−x) . If we assume either that k > 1 or that b0 = 0, then we can deﬁne g∗alternatively by the integral g∗(τ) =  i 2π k−1 Z ∞ −τ (z + τ)−k g(−z) dz .
(7.3) (The integral is independent of the path chosen because the integrand is holomorphic in z.) Since h is holomorphic, (7.1) implies that the completion of h is related to its shadow by (4πτ2)k ∂b h(τ) ∂τ = −2πi g(τ) .
(7.4) We denote by M !
k|0 the space of weakly holomorphic pure mock modular forms of weight k and arbitrary level. (The “0” in the notation corresponds to the word “pure” and will be replaced by an arbitrary integer or half-integer in §7.3.) This space clearly contains the space M !
k of ordinary weakly holomorphic modular forms (the special case g = 0, h = b h) and we have an exact sequence 0 − →M !
k − →M !
k|0 S − →M2−k , (7.5) where the shadow map S sends h to g.13 12One can also consider the case where the shadow is allowed to be a weakly holomorphic modular form, but we do not do this since none of our examples will be of this type.
13We will use the word “shadow” to denote either g(τ) or g(τ), but the shadow map, which should be linear over C, always sends h to g, the complex conjugate of its holomorphic shadow. We will also often be sloppy and say that the shadow of a certain mock modular form “is” some modular form g when in fact it is merely proportional to g, since the constants occurring are arbitrary and are often messy.
– 41 – In the special case when the shadow g is a unary theta series as in (3.10) or (3.11) (which can only hapen if k equals 3/2 or 1/2, respectively), the mock modular form h is called a mock theta function. All of Ramanujan’s examples, and all of ours in this paper, are of this type. In these cases the incomplete gamma functions in (7.2) can be expressed in terms of the complementary error function erfc(x) = 2π−1/2 R ∞ x e−t2dt : Γ  −1 2, x  = 2 √x e−x −2 √π erfc  √x  , Γ  1 2, x  = √π erfc  √x  .
(7.6) A very simple, though somewhat artiﬁcial, example of a mock modular form is the weight 2 Eisenstein series E2(τ) mentioned in §3.1, which is also a quasimodular form. Here the shadow g(τ) is a constant and its non-holomorphic Eichler integral g∗(τ) simply a multiple of 1/τ2 .
This example, however, is atypical, since most quasimodular forms (like E2(τ)2) are not mock modular forms. We end this subsection by giving a number of less trivial examples. Many more will occur later.
Example 1. In Ramanujan’s famous last letter to Hardy in 1920, he gives 17 examples of mock theta functions, though without giving any complete deﬁnition of this term. All of them have weight 1/2 and are given as q-hypergeometric series. A typical example (Ramanujan’s second mock theta function of “order 7” — a notion that he also does not deﬁne) is F7,2(τ) = −q−25/168 ∞ X n=1 qn2 (1 −qn) · · · (1 −q2n−1) = −q143/168  1 + q + q2 + 2q3 + · · ·  .
(7.7) This is a mock theta function of weight 1/2 on Γ0(4) ∩Γ(7) with shadow the unary theta series X n≡2 (mod 7) χ12(n) n qn2/168 , (7.8) with χ12(n) as in (3.13).
The product η(τ)F7,2(τ) is a strongly holomorphic mixed mock modular form of weight (1, 1/2), and by an identity of Hickerson [72] is equal to an indeﬁnite theta series: η(τ) F7,2(τ) = X r, s ∈Z+ 5 14 1 2  sgn(r) + sgn(s)  (−1)r−s q(3r2+8rs+3s2)/2 .
(7.9) Example 2. The second example is the generating function of the Hurwitz-Kronecker class numbers H(N). These numbers are deﬁned for N > 0 as the number of PSL(2, Z)-equivalence classes of integral binary quadratic forms of discriminant −N, weighted by the reciprocal of the number of their automorphisms (if −N is the discriminant of an imaginary quadratic ﬁeld – 42 – K other than Q(i) or Q(√−3), this is just the class number of K), and for other values of N by H(0) = −1/12 and H(N) = 0 for N < 0. It was shown in [126] that the function H(τ) := ∞ X N=0 H(N) qN = −1 12 + 1 3q3 + 1 2q4 + q7 + q8 + q11 + · · · (7.10) is a mock modular form of weight 3/2 on Γ0(4), with shadow the classical theta function θ(τ) = P qn2. Here H(τ) is strongly holomorphic, but this is very exceptional. In fact, up to minor variations it is essentially the only known non-trivial example of a strongly holomorphic pure mock modular form, which is why we will introduce mixed mock modular forms below.
As mentioned earlier, this mock modular form has appeared in the physics literature in the context of topologically twisted supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory on CP2 [120].
Example 3.
This example is taken from [129]. Set F (6) 2 (τ) = − X r>s>0 χ12(r2 −s2) s qrs/6 = q + 2q2 + q3 + 2q4 −q5 + · · · (7.11) with χ12 as in (3.13), and let E2(τ) be the quasimodular Eisenstein series of weight 2 on SL(2, Z) as deﬁned in §3.1. Then the function h(6)(τ) = 12F (6) 2 (τ) −E2(τ) η(τ) = q−1/24  −1 + 35q + 130q2 + 273q3 + 595q4 + · · ·  (7.12) is a weakly holomorphic mock modular form of weight 3/2 on SL(2, Z) with shadow proportional to η(τ). More generally, if we deﬁne F (6) k (τ) = − X r>s>0 χ12(r2 −s2) sk−1qrs/6 (k > 2, k even) , (7.13) then for all ν ≥0 we have 24ν   2ν ν  [h(6), η]ν = 12F (6) k −Ek + cusp form of weight k , k = 2ν + 2 , (7.14) where [h(6), η]ν denotes the νth Rankin-Cohen bracket of the mock modular form h(6) and the modular form η in weights (3/2, 1/2). This statement, and the similar statements for other mock modular forms which come later, are proved by the method of holomorphic projection, which we do not explain here, and are intimately connected with the mock Jacobi forms introduced in the next subsection. That connection will also explain the superscript “6” in (7.11)–(7.14).
Example 4. Our last example is very similar to the preceding one. Set F (2) 2 (τ) = X r>s>0 r−s odd (−1)r s qrs/2 = q + q2 −q3 + q4 −q5 + · · · .
(7.15) – 43 – Then the function h(2)(τ) = 24F (2) 2 (τ) −E2(τ) η(τ)3 = q−1/8  −1 + 45q + 231q2 + 770q3 + 2277q4 + · · ·  (7.16) is a weakly holomorphic mock modular form of weight 1/2 on SL(2, Z) with shadow proportional to η(τ)3 and, as in Example 3, if we set F (2) k (τ) = − X r>s>0 r−s odd (−1)r sk−1 qrs/2 (k > 2, k even) , (7.17) then for all ν ≥0 we have 8ν   2ν ν  [h(2), η3]ν = 24F (2) k −Ek + cusp form of weight k , k = 2ν + 2 , (7.18) where [h(2), η3]ν denotes the Rankin-Cohen bracket in weights (1/2, 3/2).
In fact, the mock modular form h(2), with the completely diﬀerent deﬁnition h(2)(τ) = ϑ2(τ)4 −ϑ4(τ)4 η(τ)3 − 24 ϑ3(τ) X n∈Z qn2/2−1/8 1 + qn−1/2 , (7.19) arose from the works of Eguchi-Taormina [56] and Eguchi–Ooguri–Taormina–Yang [53] in the late 1980’s in connection with characters of the N = 4 superconformal algebra in two dimensions and the elliptic genus of K3 surfaces, and appears explicitly in the work of Ooguri [99] (it is q−1/8(−1 + F(τ)/2) in Ooguri’s notation) and Wendland [121].
It has recently aroused considerable interest because of the “Mathieu moonshine” discovery by Eguchi, Ooguri and Tachikawa (see [52, 24]) that the coeﬃcients 45, 231, 770, . . . in (7.16) are the dimensions of certain representations of the Mathieu group M24 . The equality of the right-hand sides of (7.16) and (7.19), which is not a priori obvious, follows because both expressions deﬁne mock modular forms whose shadow is the same multiple of η(τ)3, and the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients agree.
7.2 Mock Jacobi forms By a (pure) mock Jacobi form14 (resp. weak mock Jacobi form) of weight k and index m we will mean a holomorphic function ϕ on I H×C that satisﬁes the elliptic transformation property (4.2), and hence has a Fourier expansion as in (4.3) with the periodicity property (4.4) and a theta expansion as in (4.10), and that also satisﬁes the same cusp conditions (4.5) (resp. (4.7)) as in 14We mention that there are related constructions and deﬁnitions in the literature. The weak Maass-Jacobi forms of [14] include the completions of our mock Jacobi forms, but in general are non-holomorphic in z as well as in τ. See also [27] and [18]. The functions discussed in this paper will be holomorphic in z.
– 44 – the classical case, but in which the modularity property with respect to the action of SL(2, Z) on I H×Z is weakened: the coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) in (4.10) are now mock modular forms rather than modular forms of weight k −1 2, and the modularity property of ϕ is that the completed function b ϕ(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z/2mZ b hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) , (7.20) rather than ϕ itself, transforms according to (4.1). If gℓdenotes the shadow of hl, then we have b ϕ(τ, z) =ϕ(τ, z) + X ℓ∈Z/2mZ g∗ ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) with g∗ ℓas in (7.2) and hence, by (7.1), ψ(τ, z) := τ k−1/2 2 ∂ ∂τ b ϕ(τ, z) .
= X ℓ∈Z/2mZ gℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) .
(7.21) (Here .
= indicates an omitted constant.) The function ψ(τ, z) is holomorphic in z, satisﬁes the same elliptic transformation property (4.2) as ϕ does (because each ϑm,ℓsatisﬁes this), satisﬁes the heat equation  8πim ∂ ∂τ −∂2 ∂z2  ψ = 0 (again, because each ϑm,ℓdoes), and, by virtue of the modular invariance property of b ϕ(τ, z), also satisﬁes the transformation property ψ(aτ + b cτ + d, z cτ + d) = |cτ + d| (cτ + d)2−k e 2πimcz2 cτ+d ψ(τ, z) ∀  a b c d  ∈SL(2; Z) (7.22) with respect to the action of the modular group. These properties say precisely that ψ is a skew-holomorphic Jacobi form of weight 3 −k and index m in the sense of Skoruppa [112, 113], and the above discussion can be summarized by saying that we have an exact sequence 0 − →Jweak k,m − →Jweak k|0,m S − →Jskew 3−k,m (7.23) (and similarly with the word “weak” omitted), where Jweak k|0,m (resp. Jk|0,m) denotes the space of weak (resp. strong) pure mock Jacobi forms and the “shadow map” S sends15 ϕ to ψ.
It turns out that most of the classical examples of mock theta functions occur as the components of a vector-valued mock modular form which gives the coeﬃcients in the theta series expansion of a mock Jacobi form. We illustrate this for the four examples introduced in the previous subsection.
Example 1. The function F7,2(τ) in the ﬁrst example of §7.1 is actually one of three “order 7 mock theta functions” {F7,j}j=1,2,3 deﬁned by Ramanujan, each given by a q-hypergeometric formula like (7.7), each having a shadow Θ7,j like in (7.8) (but now with the summation over 15This shadow map was introduced in the context of weak Maass-Jacobi forms in [14].
– 45 – n ≡j rather than n ≡2 modulo 7), and each satisfying an indeﬁnite theta series identity like (7.9). We extend {F7,j} to all j by deﬁning it to be an odd periodic function of j of period 7, so that the shadow of F7,j equals Θ7,j for all j ∈Z. Then the function F42(τ, z) = X ℓ(mod 84) χ12(ℓ) F7,ℓ(τ) ϑ42,ℓ(τ, z) (7.24) belongs to Jweak 1,42 . The Taylor coeﬃcients ξν as deﬁned in equation (4.16) are proportional to P3 j=1  F7,j, Θ7,j  ν and have the property that their completions b ξν = P3 j=1  b F7,j, Θ7,j  ν trans-form like modular forms of weight 2ν + 2 on the full modular group SL(2, Z).
Example 2. Set H0(τ) = P∞ n=0 H(4n)qn and H1(τ) = P∞ n=1 H(4n −1)qn−1 4 so that H0(τ) + H1(t) = H(τ/4). Then the function H(τ, z) = H0(τ)ϑ1,0(τ, z) + H1(τ)ϑ1,1(τ, z) = X n, r∈Z 4n−r2≥0 H(4n −r2) qn yr , (7.25) is a mock Jacobi form of weight 2 and index 1 with shadow ϑ1,0(τ, 0) ϑ1,0(τ, z) + ϑ1,1(τ, 0) ϑ1,1(τ, z).
The νth Taylor coeﬃcient ξν of H is given by 4ν  2ν ν  1 X j=0 [ϑ1,j, Hj]ν = δk,2 Ek −F (1) k + (cusp form of weight k on SL(2, Z)) , (7.26) where k = 2ν + 2 and F (1) k (τ) := X n>0 X d|n min  d, n d k−1 qn (k even, k ≥2) .
(7.27) In fact the cusp form appearing in (7.26) is a very important one, namely (up to a factor −2) the sum of the normalized Hecke eigenforms in Sk(SL(2, Z)), and equation (7.26) is equivalent to the famous formula of Eichler and Selberg expressing the traces of Hecke operators on Sk(SL(2, Z)) in terms of class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds.
Example 3. Write the function h(6) deﬁned in (7.12) as h(6)(τ) = X ∆≥−1 ∆≡−1 (mod 24) C(6)(∆) q∆/24 (7.28) with the ﬁrst few coeﬃcients C(6)(∆) given by ∆ −1 23 47 71 95 119 143 167 191 215 239 C(6)(∆) −1 35 130 273 595 1001 1885 2925 4886 7410 11466 .
– 46 – Then the function F6(τ, z) = X n, r∈Z 24n−r2≥−1 χ12(r) C(6)(24n −r2) qn yr (7.29) is a mock Jacobi form of index 6 (explaining the notation h(6)). Note that, surprisingly, this is even simpler than the expansion of the index 1 mock Jacobi form just discussed, because its twelve Fourier coeﬃcients hℓare all multiples of just one of them, while the two Fourier coeﬃcients hℓof H(τ, z) were not proportional. (This is related to the fact that the shadow η(τ) of h(6)(τ) is a modular form on the full modular group, while the shadow θ(τ) of H(τ) is a modular form on a congruence subgroup.) Speciﬁcally, we have hℓ(τ) = χ12(ℓ)h(6)(τ) for all ℓ∈Z/12Z, where χ12 is the character deﬁned in (3.13), so that F6 has the factorization F6(τ, z) = h(6)(τ) X ℓ(mod12) χ12(ℓ) ϑ6,ℓ(τ, z) = η(τ) h(6)(τ) ϑ1(τ, 4z) ϑ1(τ, 2z) .
(7.30) Combining this with (4.17) and noting that ϑ0 6,1 −ϑ0 6,5 = ϑ0 6,11 −ϑ0 6,7 = η, we see that the functions described in (7.14) are proportional to the Taylor coeﬃcients ξν(τ) of F6(τ, z).
Example 4. The fourth example is very similar. Write the mock modular form (7.16) as h(2)(τ) = X ∆≥−1 ∆≡−1 (mod 8) C(2)(∆) q∆/8 (7.31) with initial coeﬃcients given by ∆ −1 7 15 23 31 39 47 55 63 71 C(2)(∆) −1 45 231 770 2277 5796 13915 30843 65550 132825 .
Then the function F2(τ, z) = X n, r∈Z 8n−r2≥−1 χ4(r) C(2)(8n −r2) qn yr = h(2)(τ)  ϑ2,1(τ, z) −ϑ2,3(τ, z)  = h(2)(τ) ϑ1(τ, 2z) = η(τ)3 h(2)(τ) C(τ, z) (7.32) (where χ4(r) = ±1 for r ≡±1 (mod 4) and χ4(r) = 0 for r even) is a mock Jacobi form of index 2. (Here C is the Jacobi form of weight −1 and index 2 introduced in §4.3.) As in Example 3, the functions given in (7.18) are proportional to the Taylor coeﬃcients ξν of F2, because ϑ1 2,1 = −ϑ1 2,3 = η3, where ϑ1 2,ℓis deﬁned by (4.18).
– 47 – 7.3 Mock modular forms: the general case If we replace the condition “exponential growth” in 1. of 7.1 by “polynomial growth,” we get the class of strongly holomorphic mock modular forms, which we can denote Mk|0, and an exact sequence 0 →Mk →Mk|0 →M2−k. This is not very useful, however, because there are almost no examples of “pure” mock modular forms that are strongly holomorphic, essentially the only ones being the function H of Example 2 of §7.1 and its variants.
It becomes useful if we generalize to mixed mock modular forms of mixed weight k|ℓ. (Here k and ℓcan be integers or half-integers.) These are holomorphic functions h(τ), with polynomial growth at the cusps, that have completions b h of the form b h = h+P j fj g∗ j with fj ∈Mℓ, gj ∈M2−k+ℓthat transform like modular forms of weight k. The space Mk|ℓof such forms thus ﬁts into an exact sequence 0 − →Mk − →Mk|ℓ S − →Mℓ⊗M2−k+ℓ, (7.33) where the shadow map S now sends h to P j fj gj.
If ℓ= 0 this reduces to the previous deﬁnition, since M0 = C, but with the more general notion of mock modular forms there are now plenty of strongly holomorphic examples, and, just as for ordinary modular forms, they have much nicer properties (notably, polynomial growth of their Fourier coeﬃcients) than the weakly holomorphic ones. If the shadow of a mixed mock modular form h ∈Mk|ℓhappens to contain only one term f(τ)g(τ), and if f(τ) has no zeros in the upper half-plane, then f −1 h is a weakly holomorphic pure mock modular form of weight k−ℓ(and in fact, all weakly holomorphic pure mock modular forms arise in this way). For functions in the larger space M !
k|ℓof weakly holomorphic mixed mock modular forms, deﬁned in the obvious way, this always happens, so M !
k|ℓsimply coincides with Mℓ⊗M !
k−ℓand does not give anything new, but the smaller space Mk|ℓdoes not have such a decomposition and is more interesting. Moreover, there are many examples. In fact, apart from Ramanujan’s original examples of mock theta functions, which were deﬁned as q-hypergeometric series and were weakly holomorphic pure mock modular forms of weight 1/2, most of the examples of mock modular forms occurring “in nature,” such as Appell-Lerch sums or indeﬁnite theta series, are strongly holomorphic mixed modular forms.
We can also deﬁne “even more mixed” mock modular forms by replacing Mk|ℓby the space Mk = P ℓMk|ℓ, i.e., by allowing functions whose shadow is a ﬁnite sum of products fj(τ)gj(τ) with the fj of varying weights ℓj and gj of weight 2 −k + ℓj. This space ﬁts into an exact sequence 0 − →Mk − →Mk S − → M ℓ Mℓ⊗M2−k+ℓ.
(7.34) In fact, the functions in this space are the most natural objects, and from now on we will use “mock modular forms” to refer to this more general class, including the adjectives “mixed” and “pure” only when needed for emphasis. To justify this claim, we consider the space Mk of all real-analytic modular forms of weight k, i.e., real-analytic functions that transform like modular – 48 – forms of weight k and have polynomial growth at all cusps. More generally, one can consider the space Mk,ℓof real-analytic functions of polynomial growth that transform according to F(γτ) = (cτ + d)k(cτ + d)ℓF(τ) for all matrices γ =   a b c d  belonging to some subgroup of ﬁnite index of SL(2, Z). Since the function τ2 = Im(τ) transforms by (γτ)2 = τ2/|cτ + d|2, the spaces Mk,ℓand τ r 2 Mk+r,ℓ+r coincide for all r.
(Here, k, ℓand r can each be integral or half-integral.) Obviously the space Mk,ℓcontains the space Mk ⊗Mℓ, so by the comment just made, it also contains the direct sum L r∈Z τ r 2 Mk+r ⊗Mℓ+r. Elements of this subspace will be called decomposable. Now, if a function F ∈Mk = Mk,0 has the property that its τ-derivative (which automatically belongs to Mk,2 ) is decomposable, say as P j τ2rj fj gj (where the weights of fj and gj are necessarily equal to k + rj and 2 + rj, respectively), then F is the sum of a holomorphic function h and a multiple of P j fjg∗ j and the function h is a (mixed) mock modular form in the sense just explained. Conversely, a holomorphic function h is a (mixed) mock modular form of weight k if and only if there exist numbers rj and modular forms fj ∈Mk+rj and gj ∈M2+rj such that the sum b h := h + P j fjg∗ j belongs to Mk. We can thus summarize the entire discussion by the following very simple deﬁnition: A mock modular form is the holomorphic part of a real-analytic modular form whose τ-derivative is decomposable.
As examples of this more general class we mention the functions F (6) 2 and F (2) 2 deﬁned in equations (7.11) and (7.15), which are both (strong) mixed mock modular forms of total weight 2 and trivial character on the full modular group SL(2, Z), but with diﬀerent mixed weights: 12F (6) 2 is the sum of the functions E2(τ) and η(τ) h(6)(τ) of weights 2|0 and 3 2| 1 2, while 24F (2) 2 is the sum of the functions E2(τ) and η(τ)3h(2)(τ) of weights 2|0 and 1 2| 3 2.
We remark that in the pure case we have τ k 2 ·∂τF ∈M2−k = Ker  ∂τ : M0,2−k →M2,2−k  , so that the subspace Mk,0 of Mk can be characterized by a single second-order diﬀerential equation ∆kb h = 0, where ∆k = τ 2−k 2 ∂ττ k 2 ∂τ is the Laplacian in weight k. For this reason, (weak) pure mock modular forms can be, and often are, viewed as the holomorphic parts of (weak) harmonic Maass forms, i.e., of functions in M !
k annihilated by ∆k . But in the general case, there is no connection between mock modular forms or their completions and any second-order operators.
Only the Cauchy-Riemann operator ∂/∂τ is needed, and the new deﬁnition of mock modular forms as given above is both more ﬂexible and more readily generalizable than the more familiar deﬁnition of pure mock modular forms in terms of harmonic Maass forms.
Finally, we can deﬁne mixed mock Jacobi forms in exactly the same way as we deﬁned pure ones (i.e., they have theta expansions in which the coeﬃcients are mixed mock modular forms, with completions that transform like ordinary Jacobi forms). We will see in the next section that such objects arise very naturally as the “ﬁnite parts” of meromorphic Jacobi forms.
– 49 – 7.4 Superconformal characters and mock modular forms As already mentioned, mock modular forms ﬁrst made their appearance in physics some ten years before the work of Zwegers, in connection with the characters of superconformal alge-bas [56, 53]. The representations of the N = 4 superconformal algeba with central charge c = 6k are labeled by two quantum numbers, the energy h and spin l of the lowest weight state |Ω⟩, which satisfy h > k/4, l ∈{1/2, 1, . . . , k/2} for the non-BPS (massive) case and h = k/4, l ∈{0, 1/2, . . . , k/2} for the BPS (massless) case. The corresponding character, deﬁned by ch ˜ R k,h,l(τ, z) = Tr  qL0−c/24 e4πizJ0  L0|Ω⟩= h|Ω⟩, J0|Ω⟩= l|Ω⟩  , turns out to be, up to a power of q, a Jacobi form in the non-BPS case but a “mock” object in the BPS case. In particular, for k = 1 the non-BPS characters are given by ch ˜ R 1,h, 1 2(τ, z) = −qh−3 8 ϑ1(τ, z)2 η(τ)3 = −qh−3 8 η(τ)3 ϕ−2,1(τ, z)  h > 1 4  (7.35) and the BPS characters by ch ˜ R 1, 1 4 ,0(τ, z) = −ϑ1(τ, z)2 η(τ)3 µ(τ, z) , ch ˜ R 1, 1 4 , 1 2(z, τ) + 2ch ˜ R 1, 1 4 ,0(τ, z) = −q−1 8 ϑ1(τ, z)2 η(τ)3 , (7.36) where µ(τ, z) is the function deﬁned by µ(τ, z) = eπiz ϑ1(z, τ) X n∈Z (−1)nq n2+n 2 e2πinz 1 −qn e2πiz (q = e2πiτ, y = e2πiz) , (7.37) an “Appell-Lerch sum” of a type that also played a central role in Zwegers’s work16 and that we will discuss in the next section. The “mock” aspect is the fact that µ(τ, z) must be completed by an appropriate non-holomorphic correction term in order to transform like a Jacobi form.
The mock modular form h(2) arises in connection with the decomposition of the elliptic genus of a K3 surface as a linear combination of these characters. This elliptic genus is, as discussed in 4.5, equal to the weak Jacobi form 2B = 2ϕ0,1. It can be represented as a specialization of the partition function (= generating function of states) of superstrings compactiﬁed on a K3 surface [53] and as such can be decomposed into pieces corresponding to the representations of the N = 4 superconformal algebra with central charge 6k = 6. The decomposition has the form [99, 121, 55] 2ϕ0,1(τ, z) = 20 ch ˜ R 1, 1 4 ,0(z, τ) + A0 ch ˜ R 1, 1 4 , 1 2(z, τ) + ∞ X n=1 An ch ˜ R 1,n+ 1 4 , 1 2(z, τ) , (7.38) 16More precisely, the function µ(τ, z) is the specialization to u = v = z of the 2-variable function µ(u, v; τ) considered by Zwegers.
– 50 – where A0 = −2, A1 = 90, A2 = 462, . . . are the Fourier coeﬃcients 2C(2)(8n −1) of the mock modular form 2h(2)(τ). Inserting (7.35) and (7.36), we can rewrite this as η(τ)−3 ϕ0,1(τ, z) ϕ−2,1(τ, z) = −12 µ(τ, z) −h(2)(τ) .
(7.39) In the next section we will see how to interpret this equation as an example of a certain canonical decomposition of meromorphic Jacobi forms (8.52).
8. From meromorphic Jacobi forms to mock modular forms In this section we consider Jacobi forms ϕ(τ, z) that are meromorphic with respect to the variable z. It was discovered by Zwegers [130] that such forms, assuming that their poles occur only at points z ∈Qτ + Q (i.e., at torsion points on the elliptic curve C/Zτ + Z ), have a modiﬁed theta expansion related to mock modular forms. Our treatment is based on his, but the presentation is quite diﬀerent and the results go further in one key respect. We show that ϕ decomposes canonically into two pieces, one constructed directly from its poles and consisting of a ﬁnite linear combination of Appell-Lerch sums with modular forms as coeﬃcients, and the other being a mock Jacobi form in the sense introduced in the preceding section. Each piece separately transforms like a Jacobi form with respect to elliptic transformations. Neither piece separately transforms like a Jacobi form with respect to modular transformations, but each can be completed by the addition of an explicit and elementary non-holomorphic correction term so that it does transform correctly with respect to the modular group.
In §8.1 we explain how to modify the Fourier coeﬃcients hℓdeﬁned in (4.8) when ϕ has poles, and use these to deﬁne a “ﬁnite part” of ϕ by the theta decomposition (4.10). In §8.2 we deﬁne (in the case when ϕ has simple poles only) a “polar part” of ϕ as a ﬁnite linear combination of standard Appell-Lerch sums times modular forms arising as the residues of ϕ at its poles, and show that ϕ decomposes as the sum of its ﬁnite part and its polar part. Subsection 8.3 gives the proof that the ﬁnite part of ϕ is a mock Jacobi form and a description of the non-holomorphic correction term needed to make it transform like a Jacobi form. This subsection also contains a summary in tabular form of the various functions that have been introduced and the relations between them. In §8.4 we describe the modiﬁcations needed in the case of double poles (the case actually needed in this paper) and in §8.5 we present a few examples to illustrate the theory. Among the “mock” parts of these are two of the most interesting mock Jacobi forms from §7 (the one related to class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds and the one conjecturally related to representations of the Mathieu group M24). Many other examples will be given in §9.
Throughout the following sections, we use the convenient notation e(x) := e2πix.
– 51 – 8.1 The Fourier coeﬃcients of a meromorphic Jacobi form As indicated above, the main problem we face is to ﬁnd an analogue of the theta decomposi-tion (4.10) of holomorphic Jacobi forms in the meromorphic case. We will approach this problem from two sides: computing the Fourier coeﬃcients of ϕ(τ, z) with respect to z, and computing the contribution from the poles. In this subsection we treat the ﬁrst of these questions.
Consider a meromorphic Jacobi form ϕ(τ, z) of weight k and index m. We assume that ϕ(τ, z) for each τ ∈I H is a meromorphic function of z which has poles only at points z = ατ +β wit α and β rational. In the case when ϕ was holomorphic, we could write its Fourier expansion in the form (4.8). By Cauchy’s theorem, the coeﬃcient hℓ(τ) in that expansion could also be given by the integral formula h(z0) ℓ (τ) = q−ℓ2/4m Z z0+1 z0 ϕ(τ, z) e(−ℓz) dz , (8.1) where z0 is an arbitrary point of C. From the holomorphy and transformation properties of ϕ it follows that the value of this integral is independent of the choice of z0 and of the path of integration and depends only on ℓmodulo 2m (implying that we have the theta expansion (4.10)) and that each hℓis a modular form of weight k −1 2. Here each of these properties fails: the integral (8.1) is not independent of the path of integration (it jumps when the path crosses a pole); it is not independent of the choice of the initial point z0; it is not periodic in ℓ(changing ℓby 2m corresponds to changing z0 by τ); it is not modular; and of course the expansion (4.10) cannot possibly hold since the right-hand-side has no poles in z.
To take care of the ﬁrst of these problems, we specify the path of integration in (8.1) as the horizontal line from z0 to z0 + 1. If there are poles of ϕ(τ, z) along this line, this does not make sense; in that case, we deﬁne the value of the integral as the average of the integral over a path deformed to pass just above the poles and the integral over a path just below them. (We do not allow the initial point z0 to be a pole of ϕ, so this makes sense.) To take care of the second and third diﬃculties, the dependence on z0 and the non-periodicity in ℓ, we play one of these problems oﬀagainst the other. From the elliptic transformation property (4.2) we ﬁnd that h(z0+τ) ℓ (τ) = q−ℓ2/4m Z z0+1 z0 ϕ(τ, z + τ) e(−ℓ(z + τ)) dz = q−(ℓ+2m)2/4m Z z0+1 z0 ϕ(τ, z) e(−(ℓ+ 2m) z) dz = h(z0) ℓ+2m(τ) , i.e., changing z0 by τ corresponds to changing ℓby 2m, as already mentioned. It follows that if we choose z0 to be −ℓτ/2m (or −ℓτ/2m + B for any B ∈R, since it is clear that the value of the integral (8.1) depends only on the height of the path of integration and not on the initial point on this line), then the quantity hℓ(τ) := h(−ℓτ/2m) ℓ (τ) , (8.2) – 52 – which we will call the ℓth canonical Fourier coeﬃcient of ϕ, depends only on the value of ℓ(mod 2m). This in turn implies that the sum ϕF(τ, z) := X ℓ∈Z/2mZ hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) , (8.3) which we will call the ﬁnite (or Fourier) part of ϕ, is well deﬁned. If ϕ is holomorphic, then of course ϕF = ϕ, by virtue of (4.10). Hence if we deﬁne the polar part ϕP of ϕ to be ϕ −ϕF, then ϕP only depends on the principal part of ϕ at its singularities. We will give explicit formulas in §8.2 and §8.4 in the cases when all poles are single or double.
Note that the deﬁniton of hℓ(τ) can also be written hℓ(τ) = qℓ2/4m Z R/Z ϕ(τ, z −ℓτ/2m) e(−ℓz) dz , (8.4) with the same convention as above if ϕ(τ, z −ℓτ/2m) has poles on the real line.
Finally, we remark that none of these deﬁnitions have anything to do with the modular transformation property (4.1), and would also work if our initial function ϕ(τ, z) satisﬁed only the elliptic transformation property (4.2). (In that case, however, the functions hℓin general need not be modular, and in fact will be mock modular when ϕ(τ, z) is a meromorphic Jacobi form.) What we have said so far can be summarized by a commutative diagram EMer ±,m F − →E±,m ∪ ∪ , JMer k,m F − →Jk,m (8.5) where JMer k,m (resp. EMer ±,m) denote the subspace of meromorphic Jacobi (resp. elliptic) forms having poles only at torsion points z ∈Qτ + Q, and the map F sends ϕ 7→ϕF.
8.2 The polar part of ϕ (case of simple poles) We now consider the contribution from the poles. To present the results we ﬁrst need to ﬁx notations for the positions and residues of the poles of our meromorphic function ϕ. We assume for now that the poles are all simple.
By assumption, ϕ(τ, z) has poles only at points of the form z = zs = ατ + β for s = (α, β) belonging to some subset S of Q2. The double periodicity property (4.2) implies that S is invariant under translation by Z2, and of course S/Z2 must be ﬁnite.
The modular transformation property (4.1) of ϕ implies that S is SL(2, Z)-invariant. For each s = (α, β) ∈S, we set Ds(τ) = 2πi e(mαzs) Resz=zs  ϕ(τ, z)  (s = (α, β) ∈S, zs = ατ + β) .
(8.6) – 53 – The functions Ds(τ) are holomorphic modular forms of weight k −1 and some level, and only ﬁnitely many of them are distinct. More precisely, they satisfy • D(α+λ,β+µ)(τ) = e(m(µα −λβ)) D(α,β)(τ) for (λ, µ) ∈Z2 , (8.7) • Ds aτ + b cτ + d  = (cτ + d)k−1 Dsγ(τ) for γ =   a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z) , (8.8) as one sees from the transformation properties of ϕ. (The calculation for equation (8.8) is given in §8.4.) It is precisely to obtain the simple transformation equation (8.8) that we included the factor e(mαzs) in (8.6). Since we are assuming for the time being that there are no higher-order poles, all of the information about the non-holomorphy of ϕ is contained in these functions.
The strategy is to deﬁne a “polar part” of ϕ by taking the poles zs in some fundamental parallelogram for the action of the lattice Zτ + Z on C (i.e., for s = (α, β) in the intersection of S with some square box [A, A + 1) × [B, B + 1) ) and then averaging the residues at these poles over all translations by the lattice. But we must be careful to do this in just the right way to get the desired invariance properties. For each m ∈N we introduce the averaging operator Av(m) F(y)  := X λ qmλ2y2mλF(qλy) (8.9) which sends any function of y (= Z-invariant function of z) of polynomial growth in y to a function of z transforming like an index m Jacobi form under translations by the full lattice Zτ + Z. For example, we have qℓ2/4m Av(m) yℓ = X λ ∈Z q(ℓ+2mλ)2/4m yℓ+2mλ = ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) (8.10) for any ℓ∈Z . If F(y) itself is given as the average F(y) = AvZ  f(z)  := X µ∈Z f(z + µ) (z ∈C, y = e(z)) (8.11) of a function f(z) in C (of suﬃciently rapid decay at inﬁnity), then we have Av(m) F(y)  = Av(m) Zτ+Z  f(z)  := X λ, µ∈Z e2πim(λ2τ+2λz) f(z + λτ + µ) .
(8.12) We want to apply the averaging operator (8.9) to the product of the function Ds(τ) with a standard rational function of y having a simple pole of residue 1 at y = ys = e(zs), but the choice of this rational function is not obvious. The right choice turns out to be R−2mα(y), where Rc(y) for c ∈R is deﬁned by Rc(y) =      1 2 yc y + 1 y −1 if c ∈Z , y⌈c⌉ 1 y −1 if c ∈R ∖Z .
(8.13) – 54 – (Here ⌈c⌉denotes the “ceiling” of c, i.e., the smallest integer ≥c. The right-hand side can also be written more uniformly as 1 2 y⌊c⌋+1 + y⌈c⌉ y −1 , where ⌊c⌋= −⌈−c⌉denotes the “ﬂoor” of c, i.e., the largest integer ≤c.) This function looks artiﬁcial, but is in fact quite natural. First of all, by expanding the right-hand side of (8.13) in a geometric series we ﬁnd Rc(y) = ( −P∗ ℓ≥c yℓ if |y| < 1, P∗ ℓ≤c yℓ if |y| > 1, (8.14) where the asterisk on the summation sign means that the term ℓ= c is to be counted with multiplicity 1/2 when it occurs (which happens only for c ∈Z, explaining the case distinction in (8.13)). This formula, which can be seen as the prototypical example of wall-crossing, can also be written in terms of z as a Fourier expansion (convergent for all z ∈C ∖R) Rc(e(z)) = − X ℓ∈Z sgn(ℓ−c) + sgn(z2) 2 e(ℓz) (y = e(z), z2 = Im(z) ̸= 0) , (8.15) without any case distinction. Secondly, Rc(y) can be expressed in a natural way as an average: Proposition 8.1. For c ∈R and z ∈C ∖Z we have Rc(e(z)) = AvZ he(cz) 2πiz i .
(8.16) Proof: If c ∈Z, then AvZ he(cz) 2πiz i = yc 2πi X n∈Z 1 z −n = yc 2πi π tan πz = yc 2 y + 1 y −1 by a standard formula of Euler. If c / ∈Z then the Poisson summation formula and (8.15) give AvZ he(cz) 2πiz i = X n∈Z e(c(z + n)) 2πi(z + n) = X ℓ∈Z Z iz2+∞ iz2−∞ e(c(z + u)) 2πi(z + u) e(−ℓu) du  e(ℓz) = − X ℓ∈Z sgn(ℓ−c) + sgn(z2) 2 e(ℓz) = Rc(e(z)) if z2 ̸= 0, and the formula remains true for z2 = 0 by continuity. An alternative proof can be obtained by noting that e(−cz)Rc(e(z)) is periodic of period 1 with respect to c and expanding it as a Fourier series in c, again by the Poisson summation formula.
For m ∈N and s = (α, β) ∈Q2 we now deﬁne a universal Appell-Lerch sum As m(τ, z) by As m(τ, z) = e(−mαzs) Av(m) R−2mα(y/ys)  (ys = e(zs) = e(β)qα) .
(8.17) – 55 – It is easy to check that this function satisﬁes A(α+λ,β+µ) m = e(−m(µα −λβ)) A(α,β) m (λ, µ ∈Z) (8.18) and hence, in view of the corresponding property (8.7) of Ds , that the product Ds(τ)As m(τ, z) depends only on the class of s in S/Z2. We can therefore deﬁne ϕP(τ, z) := X s∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) As m(τ, z) , (8.19) and it is obvious from the above discussion that this function, which we will call the polar part of ϕ, satisﬁes the index m elliptic transformation property (4.2) and has the same poles and residues as ϕ, so that the diﬀerence ϕ −ϕP is holomorphic and has a theta expansion. In fact, we have: Theorem 8.1. Let ϕ(τ, z) be a meromorphic Jacobi form with simple poles at z = zs = ατ + β for s = (α, β) ∈S ⊂Q2, with Fourier coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) deﬁned by (8.1) and (8.2) or by (8.4) and residues Ds(τ) deﬁned by (8.6). Then ϕ has the decomposition ϕ(τ, z) = ϕF(τ, z) + ϕP(τ, z) , (8.20) where ϕF and ϕP are deﬁned by equations (8.3) and (8.19), respectively.
Proof: Fix a point P = Aτ+B ∈C with (A, B) ∈R2∖S. Since ϕ, ϕF and ϕP are meromorphic, it suﬃces to prove the decomposition (8.20) on the horizontal line Im(z) = Im(P) = Aτ2. On this line we have the Fourier expansion ϕ(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z qℓ2/4m h(P) ℓ (τ) yℓ, where the coeﬃcients h(P) ℓ are deﬁned by (8.1) (modiﬁed as explained in the text there if A = α for any (α, β) ∈S, but for simplicity we will simply assume that this is not the case, since we are free to choose A any way we want). Comparing this with (8.3) gives ϕ(τ, z) −ϕF(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z  h(P) ℓ (τ) −hℓ(τ)  qℓ2/4m yℓ (Im(z) = Im(P)) .
(8.21) But qℓ2/4m(h(P) ℓ (τ) −hℓ(τ)) is just 2πi times the sum of the residues of ϕ(τ, z)e(−ℓz) in the parallelogram with width 1 and horizontal sides at heights Aτ2 and −ℓτ2/2m, with the residues of any poles on the latter line being counted with multiplicity 1/2 because of the way we deﬁned hℓin that case, so qℓ2/4m h(P) ℓ (τ) −hℓ(τ)  = 2πi X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z sgn(α −A) −sgn(α + ℓ/2m) 2 Resz=zs  ϕ(τ, z)e(−ℓz)  = X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z sgn(α −A) −sgn(ℓ+ 2mα) 2 Ds(τ) e(−(ℓ+ mα)zs) .
– 56 – (Here “(α, β) ∈S/Z” means that we consider all α, but β only modulo 1, which is the same by periodicity as considering only the (α, β) with B ≤β < B + 1.) Inserting this formula into (8.21) and using (8.15), we ﬁnd ϕ(τ, z) −ϕF(τ, z) = − X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z e(−mαzs) Ds(τ) X ℓ∈Z sgn(Im(z −zs)) + sgn(ℓ+ 2mα) 2   y ys ℓ = X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z e(−mαzs) Ds(τ) R−2mα(y/ys) = X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z2 X λ∈Z e  −m(α −λ)(zs −λτ)  D(α−λ,β)(τ) R−2m(α−λ)(qλy/ys) = X s=(α,β) ∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) e(−mαzs) X λ∈Z qmλ2 y2mλ R−2mα(qλy/ys) , where in the last line we have used the periodicity property (8.7) of Ds(τ) together with the obvious periodicity property Rc+n(y) = ynRc(y) of Rc(y).
But the inner sum in the last expression is just Av(m) R−2mα(y/ys)  , so from the deﬁnition (8.17) we see that this agrees with ϕP(τ, z), as claimed.
8.3 Mock modularity of the Fourier coeﬃcients In subsections §8.1 and §8.2 we introduced a canonical splitting of a meromorphic Jacobi form ϕ into a ﬁnite part ϕF and a polar part ϕP, but there is no reason yet (apart from the simplicity of equation (8.2)) to believe that the choice we have made is the “right” one: we could have deﬁned periodic Fourier coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) in many other ways (for instance, by taking P = P0 −ℓ/2mτ with any ﬁxed P0 ∈C or more generally P = Pℓ−ℓτ/2m where Pℓdepends only on ℓmodulo 2m) and obtained other functions ϕF and ϕP. What makes the chosen decomposition special is that, as we will now show, the Fourier coeﬃcients deﬁned in (8.2) are (mixed) mock modular forms and the function ϕF therefore a (mixed) mock Jacobi form in the sense of §7.3. The corresponding shadows will involve theta series that we now introduce.
For m ∈N, ℓ∈Z/2mZ and s = (α, β) ∈Q2 we deﬁne the unary theta series Θs m,ℓ(τ) = e(−mαβ) X λ ∈Z+α+ℓ/2m λ e(2mβλ) qmλ2 (8.22) of weight 3/2 and its Eichler integral17 Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) = e(mαβ) 2 X λ ∈Z+α+ℓ/2m sgn(λ) e(−2mβλ) erfc  2|λ|√πmτ2  q−mλ2 (8.23) 17Strictly speaking, the Eichler integral as deﬁned by equation (7.2) with k = 1/2 would be this multiplied by 2 p π/m, but this normalization will lead to simpler formulas and, as already mentioned, there is no good universal normalization for the shadows of mock modular forms.
– 57 – (cf. (7.2) and (7.6)). One checks easily that these functions transform by Θ(α+λ,β+µ) m,ℓ (τ) = e(m(µα −λβ)) Θ(α,β) m,ℓ(τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) , (8.24) Θ(α+λ,β+µ) ∗ m,ℓ (τ) = e(−m(µα −λβ)) Θ(α,β) ∗ m,ℓ (τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) .
(8.25) with respect to translations of s by elements of Z2. From this and (8.7) it follows that the products DsΘs m,ℓand DsΘs ∗ m,ℓdepend only on the class of s in S/Z2, so that the sums over s occurring in the following theorem make sense.
Theorem 8.2. Let ϕ, hℓand ϕF be as in Theorem 8.1. Then each hℓis a mixed mock modular form of weight k −1 2 | k −1, with shadow P s∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) Θs m,ℓ(τ), and the function ϕF is a mixed mock Jacobi form. More precisely, for each ℓ∈Z/2mZ the completion of hℓdeﬁned by b hℓ(τ) := hℓ(τ) − X s∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) , (8.26) with Θs ∗ m,ℓas in (8.23), tranforms like a modular form of weight k −1/2 with respect to some congruence subgroup of SL(2, Z), and the completion of ϕF deﬁned by b ϕF(τ, z) := X ℓ(mod 2m) b hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) (8.27) transforms like a Jacobi form of weight k and index m with respect to the full modular group.
The key property needed to prove this theorem is the following proposition, essentially due to Zwegers, which says that the functions As m(τ, z) deﬁned in §8.2 are (meromorphic) mock Jacobi forms of weight 1 and index m, with shadow P ℓ(mod 2m) Θs m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) (more precisely, that each As m is a meromorphic mock Jacobi form of this weight, index and shadow with respect to some congruence subgroup of SL(2, Z) depending on s and that the collection of all of them is a vector-valued mock Jacobi form on the full modular group): Proposition 8.2. For m ∈N and s ∈Q2 the completion b As m of As m deﬁned by b As m(τ, z) := As m(τ, z) + X ℓ(mod 2m) Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) .
(8.28) satisﬁes b A(α+λ,β+µ) m (τ, z) = e(−m(µα −λβ)) b A(α,β) m (τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) , (8.29) b As m(τ, z + λτ + µ) = e(−m(λ2τ + 2λz)) b As m(τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) , (8.30) b As m aτ + b cτ + d, z cτ + d  = (cτ + d) e  mcz2 cτ + d  b Asγ m(τ, z)  γ = a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z)  .
(8.31) – 58 – Proof: The ﬁrst two properties are easy to check because they hold for each term in (8.28) separately. The modular transformation property, considerably less obvious, is essentially the content of Proposition 3.5 of [130], but the functions he studies are diﬀerent from ours and we need a small calculation to relate them. Zwegers deﬁnes two functions f (m) u (z; τ) and ˜ f (m) u (z; τ) (m ∈N, τ ∈H, z, u ∈C) by f (m) u (z; τ) = Av(m)h 1 1 −y/e(u) i , ˜ f (m) u (z; τ) = f (m) u (z; τ) −1 2 X ℓ(mod 2m) Rm,ℓ(u; τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) (here we have rewritten Deﬁnition 3.2 of [130] in our notation), where Rm,ℓ(u; τ) = X r∈ℓ+2mZ n sgn  r + 1 2  −erf √π rτ2 + 2mu2 √mτ2 o q−r2/4m e(−ru) , (8.32) and shows (Proposition 3.5) that ˜ f (m) u satisﬁes the modular transformation property ˜ f (m) u/(cτ+d)  z cτ + d; aτ + b cτ + d  = (cτ + d) e mc(z2 −u2) cτ + d  ˜ f (m) u (z; τ) (8.33) for all γ = a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z). Noting that erf(x) = sgn(x)(1 −erfc(|x|)), we ﬁnd that 1 2 Rm,ℓ(zs; τ) = X r≡ℓ(mod 2m) sgn(r + 1 2) −sgn(r + 2mα) 2 q−r2/4m y−r s + e(mαzs) Θs ∗ m,l(τ) in our notation. On the other hand, from (8.13) we have R−2mα(y) = 1 y −1 + X r∈Z sgn(r + 1 2) −sgn(r + 2mα) 2 yr (8.34) (note that the sum here is ﬁnite). Replacing y by y/ys and applying the operator Av(m), we ﬁnd (using (8.10)) e(mαzs) As m(τ, z) = −f (m) zs (z; τ) + X r∈Z sgn(r + 1 2) −sgn(r + 2mα) 2 q−r2/4m y−r s ϑm,r(τ, z) .
Combining these two equations and rearranging, we obtain b As m(τ, z) = −e(−mαzs) ˜ f (m) zs (z; τ) , and the modularity property (8.31) then follows from (8.33) after a short calculation.
– 59 – The proof of Theorem 8.2 follows easily from Proposition 8.2. We deﬁne the completion of the function ϕP studied in §8.2 by b ϕP(τ, z) := X s∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) b As m(τ, z) .
(8.35) The sum makes sense by (8.29), and from the transformation equations (8.30)–(8.31) together with the corresponding properties (8.7)–(8.8) of the residue functions Ds(τ) it follows that b ϕP(τ, z) transforms like a Jacobi form of weight k and index m with respect to the full modular group. Comparing equations (8.35) and (8.28) with equations (8.27) and (8.26), we ﬁnd that b ϕP(τ, z) −ϕP(τ, z) = X ℓ∈Z/2mZ X s ∈S/Z2 Ds(τ) Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) = ϕF(τ, z) −b ϕF(τ, z) and hence, using Theorem 8.1, that b ϕF(τ, z) + b ϕP(τ, z) = ϕF(τ, z) + ϕP(τ, z) = ϕ(τ, z) .
Since both ϕ(τ, z) and b ϕP(τ, z) transform like Jacobi forms of weight k and index m, it follows that b ϕF(τ, z) also does, and then the fact that each b hℓtransforms like a modular form of weight k−1/2 (and hence that each hℓis a mixed mock modular form with the weight and shadow given in the theorem) follows by the same argument that proves the modularity of the coeﬃcients hℓ in the theta expansion (4.10) in the classical case.
Summary. For the reader’s convenience, we give a brief summary of the results given up to now. We have the following six functions of two variables (τ, z) ∈H × C : • ϕ(τ, z), a meromorphic Jacobi form of weight k and index m, assumed to have only simple poles at z = zs = ατ + β for s = (α, β) in some discrete subset S ⊂Q2 ; • ϕF(τ, z), the ﬁnite part of ϕ, deﬁned by the theta expansion P ℓ(mod 2m) hℓ(τ)ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) where hℓ(τ) is qℓ2/4m times the ℓth Fourier coeﬃcient of ϕ(τ, z −ℓτ/2m) on the real line; • ϕP(τ, z), the polar part of ϕ, deﬁned as P s∈S/Z2 Ds(τ)As m(τ, z), where As m is an explicit Appell-Lerch sum having simple poles at z ∈zs + Zτ + Z ; • ϕC(τ, z), a non-holomorphic correction term, deﬁned as P s P ℓDs(τ)Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ)ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) where the Θs ∗ m,ℓare the Eichler integrals of explicit unary theta series of weight 3/2 ; • b ϕF(τ, z), the completed ﬁnite part, deﬁned as ϕF(τ, z) −ϕC(τ, z) ; • b ϕP(τ, z), the completed polar part, deﬁned as ϕP(τ, z) + ϕC(τ, z) .
These six functions are related by ϕF + ϕP = ϕ = b ϕF + b ϕP , ϕF −b ϕF = ϕC = b ϕP −ϕP .
(8.36) – 60 – Each of them is real-analytic in τ, meromorphic in z, satisﬁes the elliptic transformation prop-erty (4.2) with respect to z, and has precisely two of four further desirable properties of such a function (note that 6 =   4 2  ), as shown in the following table ϕ ϕF ϕP ϕC b ϕF b ϕP holomorphic in τ ?
✓ ✓ ✓ − − − transforms like a Jacobi form ?
✓ − − − ✓ ✓ holomorphic in z ?
− ✓ − ✓ ✓ − determined by the poles of ϕ ?
− − ✓ ✓ − ✓ in which the three checked entries in each row correspond to one of the equations (10.1). Each Fourier coeﬃcient hℓof ϕ is a mixed mock modular form of weight (k −1, 1/2) , and the ﬁnite part ϕF is a mixed mock Jacobi form. In the holomorphic case, the functions ϕ, ϕF and b ϕF coincide and the functions ϕP, ϕC and b ϕP vanish.
We end by mentioning one further property of the canonical decomposition ϕ = ϕF + ϕP that seems of interest. The ﬁnite part ϕP of ϕ is a linear combination of terms hℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) where hℓ(τ) is a Laurent power series in q and ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) a linear combination of terms qr2/4myr, so it satisﬁes the same growth condition as a weak Jacobi form, viz., that it contains only monomials qnyr with discriminant 4mn −r2 bounded from below. But the Appell-Lerch sums As m(τ, z) occurring in ϕP(τ, z) have the opposite property: substituting the Fourier expan-sion (8.15) of Rc into the deﬁnition (8.17), we ﬁnd that they contain only terms qnyr with 4mn−r2 = −δ2 where the numbers δ occurring are rational (more precisely, δ ∈r+2m(Z+α)) and unbounded (more precisely, δ lies between 0 and r + O(1)).
8.4 The case of double poles In this subsection we extend our considerations to the case when ϕ is allowed to have double poles, again assumed to be at points z = zs = ατ + β for s = (α, β) belonging to some discrete subset S of Q2. The ﬁrst thing we need to do is to generalize the deﬁnition (8.6) to this case.
For s ∈S we deﬁne functions Es and Ds on H by the Laurent expansion e(mαzs) ϕ(τ, zs + ε) = Es(τ) (2πiε)2 + Ds(τ) −2mα Es(τ) 2πiε + O(1) as ε →0.
(8.37) (Notice that Ds(τ) is the same function as in (8.6) when the pole is simple.) It is easily checked that the behavior of these functions under translations of s by elements of Z2 is given by equation (8.7) and its analogue for Es. For the modular behavior, we have: Proposition 8.3. The functions Es(τ) and Ds(τ) deﬁned by (8.37) are modular forms of weight k −2 and k −1, respectively. More respectively, for all s ∈S and   a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z) we have Es aτ + b cτ + d  = (cτ + d)k−2Esγ(τ) , Ds aτ + b cτ + d  = (cτ + d)k−1Dsγ(τ) .
(8.38) – 61 – Proof: We rewrite (8.37) as e(mα(zs + 2ε)) ϕ(τ, zs + ε) = Es(τ) (2πiε)2 + Ds(τ) 2πiε + O(1) , and also write αs and zs(τ) instead of just α and zs. Then using the easily checked identities zs(γτ) = zsγ(τ) cτ + d , αsγ zsγ(τ) −αs zs(γτ) = c zsγ(τ)2 cτ + d  γτ := aτ + b cτ + d  , and the modular transformation equation (4.1), we ﬁnd (cτ + d)2 Es(γτ) (2πiε)2 + (cτ + d) Ds(γτ) 2πiε ≡e  mα  zs(γτ) + 2ε cτ + d  ϕ  γτ, zs(γτ) + ε cτ + d  ≡e  mαzsγ(τ) + 2ε cτ + d  ϕ  γτ, zsγ(τ) + ε cτ + d  ≡(cτ + d)k e  mαzsγ + 2ε cτ + d + mc(zsγ + ε)2 cτ + d  ϕ  τ, zsγ + ε  ≡(cτ + d)k e(mαsγ(zsγ + 2ε)) ϕ(τ, zsγ + ε) ≡(cτ + d)k h Esγ(τ) (2πiε)2 + Dsγ(τ) 2πiε i , where “ ≡” means equality modulo a quantity that is bounded as ε →0. The claim follows.
Next, we must deﬁne a standard Appell-Lerch sum with a double pole at z = zs. We begin by deﬁning a rational function R(2) c (y) with a double pole at y = 1 for each c ∈R. Motivated by Proposition 8.1, we require R(2) c (e(z)) = AvZ  e(cz) (2πiz)2  = 1 (2πi)2 X n∈Z e(c(z −n)) (z −n)2 .
(8.39) To calculate this explicitly as a rational function, we could imitate the proof of Proposition 8.1, but it is easier to note that R(2) c =  −1 2πi d dz + c  Rc =  −y d dy + c  Rc and hence from equations (8.15), (8.14) and (8.13) we get three alternative deﬁnitions R(2) c (y) = X ℓ∈Z |ℓ−c| + sgn(z2) (ℓ−c) 2 yℓ (8.40) = (P ℓ≥c(ℓ−c) yℓ if |y| < 1 P ℓ≤c(c −ℓ) yℓ if |y| > 1 (8.41) = y⌊c⌋+1  1 (y −1)2 + c −⌊c⌋ y −1  .
(8.42) – 62 – of R(2) c (y). (Notice that in these equations neither the asterisk on the summation sign nor the case distinction for c ∈Z and c / ∈Z are needed as before, and that the function R(2) c (y), unlike Rc(y), is continuous in c.) For s = (α, β) ∈Q2 and m ∈N we set Bs m(τ, z) = e(−mαzs) Av(m) R(2) −2mα(y/ys)  , (8.43) in analogy with (8.17). If we then deﬁne the polar part ϕP of ϕ by ϕP(τ, z) = X s∈S/Z2  Ds(τ) As m(τ, z) + Es(τ) Bs m(τ, z)  ; (8.44) then the deﬁnitions of the functions Ds, Es, As m and Bs m immediately imply that ϕP has the same singularities as ϕ, so that the diﬀerence ϕF(τ, z) = ϕ(τ, z) −ϕP(τ, z) (8.45) is a holomorphic function of z.
As before, the key property of the Appell-Lerch sums is that they are again mock Jacobi forms, of a somewhat more complicated type than before. We introduce the unary theta series ϑs m,ℓ(τ) = e(−mαβ) X λ ∈Z+α+ℓ/2m e(2mβλ) qmλ2 (8.46) of weight 1/2 and its (again slightly renormalized) Eichler integral ϑs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) = ϑs m,ℓ(τ) 2π√mτ2 −e(mαβ) X λ ∈Z+α+ℓ/2m |λ| e(−2mβλ) erfc  2|λ|√πmτ2  q−mλ2 (8.47) (cf. (7.2) and (7.6)). Then we can deﬁne the completion b Bs m of Bs m by b Bs m(τ, z) := Bs m(τ, z) + m X ℓ(mod 2m) ϑs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) .
(8.48) Proposition 8.4. For m ∈N and s ∈Q2 the completion b Bs m of Bs m deﬁned by (8.48) satisﬁes b B(α+λ,β+µ) m (τ, z) = e(−m(µα −λβ + λµ)) b B(α,β) m (τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) , (8.49) b Bs m(τ, z + λτ + µ) = e(−m(λ2τ + 2λz)) b Bs m(τ) (λ, µ ∈Z) , (8.50) b Bs m aτ + b cτ + d, z cτ + d  = (cτ + d)2 e  mcz2 cτ + d  b Bsγ m (τ, z)  γ = a b c d  ∈SL(2, Z)  .
(8.51) – 63 – The proof is exactly similar to that of 8.2. We deﬁne functions g(m) u (z; τ) and ˜ g(m) u (z; τ) by applying the operator 1 2πi ∂ ∂u −2mu2 τ2 to f (m) u (z; τ) and ˜ f (m) u (z; τ); then the transformation equation (8.33) of ˜ f (m) u implies the same transformation equation for ˜ g(m) u but with the initial factor (cτ + d) replaced by (cτ + d)2, and a calculation exactly similar to the one given before shows that e(mαzs)Bs m(τ, z) diﬀers from g(m) zs (z; τ) by a ﬁnite linear combination of functions ϑm,r(τ, z) and that e(mαzs) b Bs m(τ, z) = ˜ g(m) zs (z; τ). We omit the details.
Theorem 8.3. Let ϕ be as above, with singularities at z = zs (s ∈S ⊂Q2) given by (8.37).
Then the ﬁnite part ϕF as deﬁned by (8.45) coincides with the ﬁnite part deﬁned by the theta expansion (8.3), the coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) in this expansion are mixed mock modular forms, with completion given by b hℓ(τ) = hℓ(τ) + X s∈S/Z2  Ds(τ) Θs ∗ m,ℓ(τ) + Es(τ) ϑs ∗ m,ℓ(τ)  , and the completion b ϕF deﬁned by (8.27) transforms like a Jacobi form of weight k and index m.
The proof follows the same lines as before: the equivalence of (8.3) and (8.45) is proved by expanding ϕ(τ, z) as a Fourier series along the horizontal line Im(z) = Im(P) for some generic point P ∈C and calculating the diﬀerence ϕ−ϕF as a sum of residues, and the mock modularity is proved by decomposing ϕ as b ϕF + b ϕP with b ϕF as in (8.27) and b ϕP = P s∈S/Z2  Ds b As m+Es b Bs m  , which transforms like a Jacobi form by virtue of Proposition 8.4. Again the details are left to the reader. Note that here the mock modular forms hℓ(τ) are of the “even more mixed” variety mentioned at the end of §7.2, since they now have a shadow that is a linear combination of two terms P s Ds Θs m,l and P s Es ϑs m,l belonging to two diﬀerent tensor products Mk−1 ⊗M3/2 and Mk−2 ⊗M1/2 and hence two diﬀerent mixed weights k −1 2 | k −1 and k −1 2 | k −2 rather than a single mixed weight k −1 2 | k −1 as in the case of simple poles.
8.5 Examples We end this section by giving ﬁve examples of meromorphic Jacobi forms and their canonical decompositions into a mock Jacobi form and a ﬁnite linear combination of Appell-Lerch sums.
We systematically use the notations A = ϕ−2,1, B = ϕ0,1, C = ϕ−1,2 for the three basic generators of the ring of weak Jacobi forms as described in equations (4.26)–(4.35).
Example 1: Weight 1, index 1, simple pole at z = 0. As our ﬁrst example we take the Jacobi form ϕ = C/A ∈Jmer 1,1 , which has a simple pole of residue 1/πi at z = 0 and a Fourier expansion beginning y + 1 y −1 −(y2 −y−2) q −2(y3 −y−3) q2 −2(y4 −y−4) q3 −(2y5 + y4 −y−4 −2y−5) q4 −· · · .
– 64 – Calculating the Fourier expansion of the polar part ϕP = Av(1) y+1 y−1  , we ﬁnd that it begins the same way, and indeed, we must have ϕ = ϕP because the Fourier coeﬃcients hℓall vanish (we have h−ℓ= −hℓbecause the weight is odd and hℓ+2 = hℓbecause the index is 1). So here there is no mock Jacobi form at all, but only the polar correction term given by the Appell-Lerch sum, a kind of a “Cheshire cat” example which is all smile and no cat.
Example 2: Weight 1, index 2, simple pole at z = 0.
As a second example take ϕ = BC/A ∈Jmer 1,2 . Here we ﬁnd ϕP = 12 Av(2)hy + 1 y −1 i = 12 y + 1 y −1 −12(y4 −y−4)q2 + 24(y5 −y−5) q3 + · · · ϕF = (y −y−1) −(y3 + 45y −45y−1 −y−3)q + (45y3 −231y + 231y−1 −45y−3)q2 + · · · , and by comparing the shadows and the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients (cf. eq. (7.32)), we see that ϕF is the negative of the mock Jacobi form F2(τ, z) = h(2)(τ) ϑ1(τ, 2z) discussed in Example 4 of §7.2 that is conjecturally related to representations of M24 . Using (4.31) and dividing by ϑ1(τ, 2z), we can rewrite the identity ϕ = ϕP + ϕF as η(τ)−3 ϕ0,1(τ, z) ϕ−2,1(τ, z) = − 12 ϑ1(τ, 2z) Av(2)h1 + y 1 −y i −h(2)(τ) .
(8.52) One can check that ϑ1(τ, 2z)µ(τ, z) = Av(2) 1+y 1−y  , so this agrees with the splitting (7.39) coming from the decomposition of the elliptic genus of K3 into superconformal characters.
Example 3: Weight 1, index 1/2, simple pole at z = 0. We can also multiply (7.39) by ϑ1(τ, z) and write it in the form B √ A = −12 Av( 1 2 ,−)h √y 1 −y i −h(2)(τ) ϑ1(τ, z) , (8.53) where Av( 1 2 ,−)[F(y)] := P n∈Z(−1)nqn2/2 yn F(qny).
This decomposition also ﬁts into the scheme explained in this section, but slightly modiﬁed because the index here is half-integral.
Example 4: Weight 2, index 0, double pole at z = 0. Now take ϕ = B/A, which, as we saw in §4.3, is just a multiple of the Weierstrass ℘-function.This example does not quite ﬁt in with the discussion given so far, since we did not allow m = 0 in the deﬁnition (8.9) of the averaging operator (m < 0 doesn’t work at all, because the sum deﬁning the average diverges, and m = 0 is less interesting since a form of index 0 is clearly determined up to a function of τ alone by its singularities, so that in our discussion we excluded that case too), but nevertheless it works. The decomposition ϕ = ϕP + ϕF takes the form ϕ0,1(τ, z) ϕ−2,1(τ, z) = 12 Av(0)h y (1 −y)2 i + E2(τ) , (8.54) – 65 – with the ﬁnite part being simply the quasimodular Eisenstein series E2(τ), which is also a mock modular form. (It is automatically independent of z since the index is 0.) Example 5: Weight 2, index 1, double pole at z = 0. The next example is a special case of an inﬁnite family that will be treated in detail in §9. Take ϕ = B2/A ∈Jmer 2,1 . Then we ﬁnd ϕ =  144 y (1 −y)2 + y + 22 + y−1 +  22y2 + 152y −636 + 152y−1 + 22y−2 q +  145y3 −636y2 + 3831y −7544 + 3831y−1 −636y−2 + 145y−3 q2 + · · · , ϕP = Av(1)h 144 y (1 −y)2 i = 144 y (1 −y)2 + 0 q + 144 (y3 + y−3)q2 + 288 (y4 + y−4)q3 + · · · and hence that ϕF = ϕ −ϕP = P 4n−r2≥−1 C(4n −r2) qn yr with the ﬁrst few C(∆) given by ∆ −1 0 3 4 7 8 11 12 15 C(∆) 1 22 152 −636 3831 −7544 33224 −53392 191937 .
On the other hand, we have the weak Jacobi form E4(τ)ϕ−2,1(τ, z) = P C∗(4n −r2)qnyr with ∆ −1 0 3 4 7 8 11 12 15 C∗(∆) 1 −2 248 −492 4119 −7256 33512 −53008 192513 , We see that C(∆) and C∗(∆) are very close to each other (actually, asymptotically the same) and that their diﬀerence is precisely −288 times the Hurwitz-Kronecker class number H(d).
We thus have ϕF = E4A −288H, and we have found H(τ, z), the simplest of all mock Jacobi forms, as the ﬁnite part of the meromorphic Jacobi form (E4A2 −B2)/288A. We remark that the numbers −C∗(∆) have an interesting interpretation as “traces of singular moduli” [128].
Example 6: Weight −5, index 1, simple poles at the 2-torsion points. Finally, we give an example with more than one pole. Take ϕ = A3/C ∈J1,−5. This function has three poles, all simple, at the three non-trivial 2-torsion points on the torus C/(Zτ + Z). The three corresponding modular forms, each of weight −6, are given by D(0, 1 2 )(τ) = 16 η(2τ)12 η(τ)24 , D( 1 2 ,0)(τ) = −1 4 η   τ 2 12 η(τ)24 , D( 1 2 , 1 2 )(τ) = i 4 η   τ+1 2 12 η(τ)24 , and one ﬁnds ϕ = ϕP = D(0, 1 2 )(τ) Av(1)h1 2 y −1 y + 1 i + q1/4 D( 1 2 ,0)(τ) Av(1)h 1 2y y + √q y −√q i + q1/4 D( 1 2 , 1 2 )(τ) Av(1)h 1 2y y −√q y + √q i , ϕF ≡0 , another “Cheshire cat” example (of necessity, for the same reason as in Example 1, since again m = 1 and k is odd).
– 66 – 9. Special mock Jacobi forms We now turn to the study of certain families of meromorphic Jacobi forms of weights 1 or 2 and arbitrary positive index and of their related mock Jacobi forms, the weight 2 case being the one relevant for the application to black hole microstate counting. In this section, we introduce these families and formulate a nunmber of properties of them that were found experimentally and that we will prove in §10. In particular, it will turn out that all of these functions can be expressed, using the Hecke-like operators introduced in §4.4, in terms of a collection of mock Jacobi forms Qm deﬁned (though not quite uniquely: there is some choice involved starting at m = 91) for all square-free m, of weight either 1 or 2 depending on whether m has an odd or even number of prime factors. These functions, which seem to have particularly nice arithmetic properties, include all of the examples studied in §7, and several other special mock modular forms that have appeared in the literature.
9.1 The simplest meromorphic Jacobi forms The two simplest situations for the theory described in §8 are when the meromorphic Jacobi form ϕ = ϕk,m satisﬁes either • k = 1 and ϕ(τ, z) has a simple pole at z = 0 and no other poles in C/(Zτ + Z) or • k = 2 and ϕ(τ, z) has a double pole at z = 0 and no other poles in C/(Zτ + Z), since in these two cases the modular forms Ds(τ) (resp. Es(τ)) deﬁned in §8.2 (resp. §8.4) are simply constants and the canonical Fourier coeﬃcients hℓof ϕ are pure, rather than mixed, mock modular forms. If we normalize ϕ by ϕ(τ, z) ∼(2πiz)−1 in the ﬁrst case and ϕ(τ, z) ∼(2πiz)−2 in the second case as z →0, then any two choices of ϕ diﬀer by a (weakly) holomorphic Jacobi form whose Fourier coeﬃcients are true modular forms and are therefore well understood.
It therefore suﬃces in principle to make some speciﬁc choice of ϕ1,m and ϕ2,m for each m and to study their ﬁnite parts ϕF k,m, but, as we shall see, the problem of choosing a good representative ϕ is very interesting and has several subtleties. For any choice of ϕk,m, we will use the notation Φk,m := ϕF k,m, with decorations like Φstand k,m or Φopt k,m corresponding to the choice of ϕk,m. The shadow of the mock Jacobi form Φk,m is independent of the choice of representative and is a multiple of P ℓ(mod 2m) ϑ2−k m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z), where ϑ1 m,ℓand ϑ0 m,ℓare deﬁned as at the end of §4.2.
The Jacobi forms ϕ2,m are the ones related to the Fourier coeﬃcients ψm of Φ10(Ω)−1 that appear in the application to black holes (eq. (1.1)). Indeed, since the principal part of the pole of ψm(τ, z) at z = 0 equals p24(m + 1) ∆(τ)−1 (2πiz)−2, we can write ∆(τ)ψm(τ, z) as the sum of p24(m + 1) ϕ2,m and a weak Jacobi form. If we make the simplest choice for ϕ2,m, namely ϕstand 2,m = Bm+1 12m+1A , (9.1) – 67 – where A = ϕ−2,1, B = ϕ0,1 are the special Jacobi forms introduced in §4 (which has the correct principal part because A(τ, z) ∼(2πiz)2 and B(τ, z) →12 as z →0), then the ﬁrst few values of ∆(τ) ψm(τ, z) −p24(m + 1) ϕstand 2,m (τ, z) can be read oﬀfrom (5.16). For instance, we have p24(3) = 3200 and the fourth equation of (5.16) says that ∆ψ2 = 3200 ϕstand 2,2 + 16 9 E4AB+ 10 27E6A2.
In the weight one case we can also make a simple standard choice of ϕ. It has to be divisible by C because the weight is odd, and since C ∼4πiz for z →0 we can choose ϕstand 1,m = Bm−1 C 2 · 12m−1 A = C 2 ϕstand 2,m−2 .
(9.2) as our standard functions. However, we emphasize that (9.1) and (9.2) are only the starting points for our discussion and will be replaced by better choices as we go along.
We will apply the decomposition of §8 to the functions ϕ. The polar part is independent of the choice of ϕ and is given by ϕP k,m = Ak,m, where Ak,m is given (in the notation of equations (8.17) and (8.43)) by A1,m = A(0,0) 1,m = Av(m)h1 2 y + 1 y −1 i , A2,m = A(0,0) 2,m = Av(m)h y (y −1)2 i (9.3) or—written out explicitly—by A1,m(τ, z) = −1 2 X s∈Z qms2 y2ms 1 + qsy 1 −qsy , A2,m(τ, z) = X s∈Z qms2+s y2ms+1 (1 −qsy)2 .
(9.4) Also independent of the choice of ϕ is the correction term which must be added to the ﬁnite part and subtracted from the polar part of ϕ2,m in order to make these functions transform like Jacobi forms. In particular, for the double pole case, we ﬁnd from (8.48) that the completion b Φ2,m of Φ2,m = ϕF 2,m for any choice of ϕ2,m is given by b Φ2,m(τ, z) = Φ2,m(τ, z) − r m 4π X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m,ℓ ∗(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) , (9.5) where ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) = ϑm,ℓ(τ, 0) and (ϑ0 m,ℓ)∗is normalized18 as in equations (7.2) and (7.6).
The functions A1,m, A2,m have wall-crossings, so their Fourier expansions depend on the value of z2 = Im(z). In the range 0 < z2 < τ2, or |q| < |y| < 1, they are given by A1,m =  − X s≥0 X∗ ℓ≥0 + X s<0 X∗ ℓ≤0  qms2+ℓs y2ms+ℓ, (9.6) A2,m = X s≥0 X∗ ℓ≥0 − X s<0 X∗ ℓ≤0  ℓqms2+ℓs y2ms+ℓ, (9.7) 18Note that the function ϑ(0,0) ∗ m,ℓ as deﬁned in (8.47) is equal to 1/ √ 4πm times (ϑ0 m,ℓ)∗.
– 68 – where the asterisk on the summation sign has the usual meaning (count the term ℓ= 0 with multiplicity 1/2). Hence the coeﬃcient of qnyr is zero unless ∆= 4mn −r2 is the negative of the square of an integer congruent to r modulo 2m, in which case it is 0, ± 1 2, ±1 or ±2 if k = 1 and is 0, ± √ −∆or ±2 √ −∆if k = 2. (Compare the remark at the end of §8.3.) If we expand A1,m and A2,m in Fourier series for z2 in some other interval (N, N + 1)τ2, then the formulas (9.6) and (9.7) are unchanged except for a shift in the inequalities deﬁning the summation. In summary, the Fourier coeﬃcients of the polar part of ϕ, although not quite like the coeﬃcients of a usual Jacobi form—they do not only depend on ∆and on r mod 2m, they are non-zero for inﬁnitely many negative ∆, and there is wall-crossing—are extremely simple and have very slow growth (at most like p |∆|).
The interesting part of the Fourier expansion of ϕk,m is therefore the mock part Φk,m. Here the choice of ϕk,m makes a big diﬀerence. For instance, Examples 1–4 of §8.5 say that the mock Jacobi forms Φstand k,m corresponding to the standard choices (9.1) and (9.2) for small m are Φstand 1,1 = 0, Φstand 1,2 = 1 24 F2 , Φstand 2,0 = 1 12 E2 , Φstand 2,1 = 1 144 E4 A −2 H , (9.8) and we see that this choice is a good one in the ﬁrst three cases (indeed, in these cases there is no choice!) but that, as we have already observed, a better choice of ϕ in the fourth case would have been the function ϕopt 2,1 = ϕstand 2,1 − 1 144E4A, with mock part Φopt 2,1 = −2H, because it has no terms qnyr with discriminant ∆= 4n −r2 smaller than zero and (consequently) has Fourier coeﬃcients that grow polynomially in ∆(actually, like ∆1/2+ε) rather than exponentially in √ ∆.
Our next main objective, to which we devote the next subsection, is therefore to replace our initial choice of ϕk,m as given by (9.1) or (9.2) by an optimal choice ϕopt k,m, where “optimal” means “with the negative discriminants d = 4mn −r2 that occur being as little negative as possible” or, equivalently, “with Fourier coeﬃcients growing as slowly as possible.” This choice turns out to have Fourier coeﬃcients of very much smaller growth than those of our initial choice ϕstand k,m in all cases, and to be unique in many cases.
9.2 Choosing the function ϕ for weight 2 and small index We now consider in more detail the meromorphic Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index m with a double pole at the origin introduced in §9.1. Any such form will have the form ϕ2,m = ψ0,m+1 12m+1A , ψ0,m+1 ∈Bm+1 + A · e J2,m ⊂ e J0,m+1 .
(9.9) For each m, we want to choose a meromorphic Jacobi form ϕopt 2,m diﬀering from ϕstand 2,m by a weak Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m whose coeﬃcients grow as slowly as possible. We are interested both in the form of the corresponding ψ0,m+1 = ψopt 0,m+1 as a polynomial in A and B with modular form coeﬃcients, and in the nature of the ﬁnite part Φopt 2,m = ϕopt 2,m −A2,m as a – 69 – mock Jacobi form. In this subsection we will look at the optimal choice for 0 ≤m ≤11 to see what phenomena occur, while in the next subsection, we report on the calculations for higher values up to about 250 and formulate the general results.
For m=0, we have to choose ϕopt 2,0 = ϕstand 2,0 = B 12A , ψopt 0,1 = B because there are no weak Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index 0. The mock part Φopt 2,0 here is E2(τ)/12, as we have already seen (Example 3 of §8.5).
For m=1 the only freedom is the addition of a multiple of E4A and (as recalled in §9.1) the optimal choice is ϕopt 2,1 = ϕstand 2,1 −E4A 144 , ψopt 0,2 = B2 −E4A2 , (9.10) because then Φopt 2,1 = −2H has no terms qnyr with 4n −r2 < 0 and its Fourier coeﬃcients −2H(4n −r2) have only polynomial growth as 4n −r2 →∞.
Now we look at m=2. Here we can modify 123 Φstand 2,2 = B3/A −123A2,2 by adding to it any linear combination of the two weak Jacobi forms E4AB and E6A2. Each of these three functions has Fourier coeﬃcients of the form c(n, r) = Cϕ(8n−r2) (because the (n, r)-coeﬃcient of a Jacobi form of prime or prime power index m and even weight always depends only on the discriminant 4mn −r2), with the ﬁrst few given by ∆ −4 −1 0 4 7 8 12 15 16 C(123Φstand 2,2 ; ∆) 1 32 366 528 1056 −10144 −14088 92832 −181068 C(E4AB; ∆) 1 8 −18 144 2232 −4768 −22536 96264 −151884 C(E6A2; ∆) 1 −4 6 −480 1956 −2944 −28488 96252 −139452 It follows from this table that the linear combination ϕopt 2,2 = ϕstand 2,2 − 1 576 E4AB + 1 864E6A2 = B3 −3E4A2B + 2E6A3 123 A (9.11) has a mock Jacobi part Φopt 2,2 = ϕopt 2,2 −A2,2 with no negative terms and much smaller coeﬃcients: d −4 −1 0 4 7 8 12 15 16 C(Φopt 2,2 ; ∆) 0 0 1/4 −1/2 −1 −1 −2 −2 −5/2 On inspection of these numbers and the next few values, we recognize them as simple linear combinations of Hurwitz class numbers, namely: C(Φopt 2,2 ; ∆) = ( −H(∆) if ∆≡7 (mod 8) , −H(∆) −2H(∆/4) if ∆≡0 (mod 4) , – 70 – which says that Φopt 2,2 is simply −H|V2, with H as in (7.25) and V2 as in (4.37). (Note, by the way, the similarity between (9.11) and (4.33). Together they say that ϕopt 2,2 = (C/2A)2.) The cases m=3, m=4, m=5, m=7, m=8, m=9 and m=11 are similar to the case m = 2.
For each of these values of m the coeﬃcient of qnyr in Φstand 2,m depends only on ∆= 4nm −r2, the number of negative ∆for which this coeﬃcient is non-zero equals the dimension of the space of weak Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index m, and we can subtract a unique weak Jacobi form from ϕstand 2,m to obtain a meromorphic Jacobi form ϕopt 2,m whose ﬁnite part is a strongly holomorphic mock Jacobi form with very small Fourier coeﬃcients. For example, for m = 3 the optimal choice of ϕopt 2,m is ϕopt 2,3 = ψopt 0,4 /124A with ψopt 0,4 = B4 −6E4A2B2 + 8E6A3B −3E2 4A4 (9.12) and the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients of 124 Φstand 2,3 and Φopt 2,3 are given by ∆ −9 −4 −1 0 3 8 11 12 15 124 C(Φstand 2,3 ; ∆) 1 42 687 5452 1104 8088 −1488 −139908 −19629 C(Φopt 2,3 ; ∆) 0 0 0 1/3 −1/3 −1 −1 −4/3 −2 Again we recognize the coeﬃcients C(Φopt 2,3 ; ∆) as −H(∆) if 9 ∤∆and −H(∆) −3H(∆/9) if 9 | ∆, so that just as for m = 2 we ﬁnd that the mock part of ϕopt 2,3 equals −F1|V3. The same thing also happens for m = 5, 7 and 11, suggesting that for prime values of m we can always choose Φopt 2,p = −H|Vp (p prime).
(9.13) This will be proved in §10. For the prime-power values m = 4, 8 and 9 this formula no longer holds, but the coeﬃcients of Φopt 2,m are still simple linear combinations of Hurwitz-Kronecker class numbers and we ﬁnd the expressions Φopt 2,4 = −H|V4 + 2H|U2 , Φopt 2,8 = −H|V8 + 2H|U2V2 , Φopt 2,9 = −H|V9 + 3H|U3 , where Ut is the Hecke-like operator deﬁned in §4.4 that multiplies the index of a Jacobi form (or mock Jacobi form) by t2. This suggests that for prime power values of m we can choose Φopt 2,m = −2 H| V(1) 2,m (m a prime power) (9.14) where V(1) k,t for t ∈N is the Hecke-like operator from Jacobi (or weakly holomorphic Jacobi, or mock Jacobi) forms of weight k and index 1 to forms of weight k and index t deﬁned in (4.38).
Formula (9.14) will also be proved in §10.
The data for the values discussed so far (0 ≤m ≤11, m ̸= 6, 10) is summarized in the table below, which expresses the weak Jacobi form ψopt 0,m+1 = 12m+1A ϕopt 2,m for each of these values of m as a polynomial in A and B.
In this table we notice many regularities, e.g., – 71 – the coeﬃcients of E4A2Bm−2, E6A3Bm−3 and E2 4A4Bm−4 in ψopt 0,m are always given by −   m 2  , 2   m 3  and −3   m 4  , respectively, and more generally, if we write ψopt 0,m as Pm i=0 fm,i Ai Bm−i with fm,i = fm,i(τ) ∈M2i, fm,0 = 1, then the constant terms fm,i(∞) of the modular forms fm,i (which can be read oﬀfrom the table by setting E4 = E6 = 1 and D = 0) are given in each case by fm,i(∞) = (−1)i−1(i −1)   m i  or equivalently by the generating function m X i=0 fm,i(∞) Xm−i = (X −1)m + m (X −1)m−1 = (X −1)m−1(X + m −1) , (9.15) e.g. X8 −28X6 + 112X5 −210X4 + 224X3 −140X2 + 48X −7 = (X −1)7(X + 7). This formula has a simple interpretation: the constant term with respect to q of P fm,i Ai Bm−i is P fm,i(∞)(y−1 −2 + y)i(y−1 + 10 + y)m−i and this Laurent polynomial—subject to the condition fm,1(∞) = 0, which comes from the fact that there are no modular forms of weight 2 on SL(2, Z)—has minimal growth O  y + y−1 precisely for the coeﬃcients deﬁned by (9.15).
m 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 10 12 Bm 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 E4 · A2Bm−2 0 −1 −3 −6 −10 −15 −28 −36 −45 −66 E6 · A3Bm−3 0 0 2 8 20 40 112 168 240 440 E2 4 · A4Bm−4 0 0 0 −3 −15 −45 −210 −378 −630 −1485 E4E6 · A5Bm−5 0 0 0 0 4 24 224 504 1008 3168 E3 4 · A6Bm−6 0 0 0 0 0 −5 −140 −420 −1050 −4620 D · A6Bm−6 0 0 0 0 0 1 10 30 48 222 E2 4E6 · A7Bm−7 0 0 0 0 0 0 48 216 720 4752 E4 4 · A8Bm−8 0 0 0 0 0 0 −7 −63 −315 −3465 E4D · A8Bm−8 0 0 0 0 0 0 −4 −36 −18 −360 E3 4E6 · A9Bm−9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 80 1760 E6D · A9Bm−9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 −16 80 E5 4 · A10Bm−10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 −9 −594 E2 4D · A10Bm−10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 702 E4 4E6 · A11Bm−11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 120 E4E6D · A11Bm−11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 −672 E6 4 · A12Bm−12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 −11 E3 4D · A12Bm−12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 188 D2 · A12Bm−12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 −8 Table 2: Coeﬃcients of ψopt 0,m in terms of the standard basis. Here D := 21133∆.
For m=6 several new things happen, all connected with the fact that 6 is the ﬁrst value – 72 – of m having more than one prime factor. First of all, the formula (9.14), which worked for prime powers, now fails: −2H|V(1) 2,6 is not a possible choice for Φ2,6. The reason is that, as we will see later in general, the form H|V(1) 2,m (for any m) is invariant under all Atkin-Lehner involutions, but Φ2,m is not when m is not a prime power. The expression −2H|V(1) 2,6 does, however, give the optimal choice of the eigencomponent Φ++ 2,6 of Φ2,6 with eigenvalues W2 = W3 = +1. The other eigencomponent, corresponding to W2 = W3 = −1, is obtained by subtracting a multiple of the non-weak Jacobi form ϕ− 2,6 given in (4.48) from π− 2 (Φopt 2,6 ) (which is weakly holomorphic but not weak), and turns out to be simply a multiple of the mock Jacobi form F6 deﬁned in §7.2 (Example 3), giving as our ﬁrst choice of the “optimal” mock modular form ΦI 2,6 = −2 H | V(1) 2,6 −1 24 F6 .
(9.16) The second new phenomenon for m = 6 is that requiring the order of the poles to be as small as possible no longer ﬁxes a unique optimal choice. The function ΦI 2,6 deﬁned above has an even part that is strongly holomorphic (because H is) and an odd part that has discriminant ∆≥−1 (because C(6)(∆) = 0 for ∆< −1), but we can change this choice without disturbing the discriminant bound ∆≥−1 by adding to it an arbitrary multiple of the function K6 = E4AB5 −5E6A2B4 + 10E2 4A3B3 −10E4E6A4B2 + (5E3 4 −1 4D)A5B −E2 4E6A5 125 (9.17) which is (up to a scalar factor, ﬁxed here by requiring K6 = y −2 + y−1 + O(q)) the unique Jacobi form of weight 2 and index 6 satisfying the same discriminant bound.
Two particularly nice choices besides the function ΦI 2,6 are the functions ΦII 2,6 = ΦI 2,6 −1 24 K6 ΦIII 2,6 = ΦI 2,6 + 1 4 K6 (9.18) The special properties of these two choices are that ΦII 2,6 is the unique choice with c(Φ; 0, 1) = 0 and (hence) has the form 12−7 P7 i=0 f7,iAi−1B7−i with f7,i satisfying (9.15), while ΦIII 2,6 is the unique choice for which c(n, r) = 0 whenever 24n = r2. (This last choice is from some points of view the most canonical one.) Each of these three special choices, as we shall see below, has analogues for all m, although in general none of them is canonical, since for large m we can change them by adding cusp forms without aﬀecting their deﬁning properties and we do not know any criterion that selects a unique form.
The following table, which gives the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients C(Φ; ∆, r (mod 12)) for the Jacobi form K6 and each of the ﬁve mock Jacobi forms −2H|V(1) 2,6, F6, ΦI 2,6, 12ΦII 2,6 and ΦIII 2,6, summarizes the above discussion. In this table we have set in boldface the Fourier co-eﬃcients C(∆, r) whose special properties determine the choice of Φ (namely, C(−1, ±1) + C(−1, ±5) = 0 for ΦI, C(−1, ±1) = 0 for ΦII, and C(0, 0) = 0 for ΦIII). We mention in passing – 73 – ∆ −1 −1 0 8 12 15 20 23 23 24 32 36 39 r (mod 12) ±1 ±5 0 ±4 6 ±3 ±2 ±1 ±5 0 ±4 6 ±3 K6 1 1 −2 10 28 10 −12 13 13 −44 58 104 2 −2H | V2,6 0 0 1 2 −1 2 −1 −1 −1 −3 2 −3 2 −1 −5 2 −2 −2 F6 −1 1 0 0 0 0 0 35 −35 0 0 0 0 ΦI 2,6 1 24 −1 24 1 2 −1 2 −1 −1 −1 −71 24 −1 24 −1 −5 2 −2 −2 12 ΦII 2,6 0 −1 7 −11 −26 −17 −6 −42 −7 10 −59 −76 −25 ΦIII 2,6 7 24 5 24 0 2 6 3 2 −4 7 24 77 24 −12 12 24 −3 2 Table 3: Jacobi and mock Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index 6 that the function ψI 0,7 = 127AϕI 2,6 corresponding to (9.16) is precisely equal to B times ψopt 0,6 as given in Table 2. We do not know if this has any special signiﬁcance. It may be connected with the fact that ψopt 0,6 , which is equal to the quotient ϑ1(τ, 4z)/ϑ1(τ, 2z) (Watson quintuple product identity), is a (−1)–eigenvector of the involution W2 = W3 on e J0,6.
For m=10 the situation is similar. Again, we can achieve ∆≥−1 but not uniquely because there is a weak Jacobi form K10 ∈e J2,10 (unique up to a normalizing factor, which we ﬁx in the same way as before) satisfying the same discriminant bound and we can change ϕ2,10 an arbitrary multiple of K10. We again have three distinguished choices ϕII 2,10 = ψII 0,11 1211A , ϕI 2,10 = ϕII 2,10 + 1 12 K10 ϕIII 2,10 = ϕI 2,10 + 3 8 K10 , (9.19) where ψII 0,11 ∈e J0,11 is given (with D = 32(E3 4 −E2 6) = 21133∆as in Table 2) by ΨII 11 = B11 −55E4A2B9 + 330E6A3B8 −990E2 4A4B7 + 1848E4E6A5B6 −(2310E3 4 −111D)A6B5 +1980E2 4E6A7B4 −(1155E4 4 + 120E4D)A8B3 + (440E3 4E6 + 20E6D)A9B2 −(99E5 4 −117E2 4D)A10B + (10E4 4E6 −56E4E6D)A11 (9.20) and is the unique choice satisfying (9.15), ΦIII 2,10 is the unique choice with no ∆= 0 coeﬃcients, and ΦI 2,10 is the unique choice whose invariant part under W2 (or W5) is strongly holomorphic.
Explicitly, we have ΦI 2,10 = −2 H|V(1) 2,10 −1 12 F10 (9.21) where F10 is a mock Jacobi form of weight 2 and index 10 with Fourier coeﬃcients given by c(F10; n, r) = ( C(10)(40n −r2) r ≡±1 (mod 20) or r ≡±3 (mod 20) −C(10)(40n −r2) r ≡±7 (mod 20) or r ≡±9 (mod 20) (9.22) for a function C10(∆) whose ﬁrst few values are – 74 – ∆ −1 31 39 71 79 111 119 151 159 191 199 231 239 C(10)(∆) −1 9 21 35 63 57 112 126 207 154 306 315 511 , or equivalently, where F10 has a theta expansion of the form F10(τ, z) = X ℓ(mod 20) (ℓ,10)=1 hℓ(τ) ϑ10,ℓ(τ, z) (9.23) with mock modular forms hℓ= hℓ(τ) having expansions beginning h1 = −h9 = −h11 = h19 = q−1/40  −1 + 21q + 63q2 + 112q3 + · · ·  , (9.24) h3 = −h7 = −h13 = h17 = q31/40  9 + 35q + 57q2 + 126q3 · · ·  .
(9.25) 9.3 Further data and formulation of main results for the weight 2 family In §9.2, we found that the functions Φ2,m for m ≤11 could all be obtained, using the Hecke-like operators from §4.4, from just three functions H, F6 and F10. Continuing, we ﬁnd that for m = 12 the same statement holds: the (+1, +1) eigencomponent of this form with respect to the involutions W4 and W3 can be chosen to be −2H|V(1) 2,12 and the (−1, −1) eigencomponent can be chosen to be 1 12F6|V(6) 2,2, with V(M) k,t as in (4.38) (so V (1) 2,12 = 1 4(V12−2V2U3) and V(6) 2,2 = 1 2V2).
Thus Φ2,12 = −2H | V(1) 2,12 + 1 12 F6 | V(6) 2,2 (9.26) is a possible choice for Φ2,12. Similarly, for m = 18 and m = 24 we can take the functions Φ2,18 = −2H | V(1) 2,18 + 1 24 F6 | V(6) 2,3 , Φ2,24 = −2H | V(1) 2,24 + 1 24 F6 | V(6) 2,4 (9.27) as our representatives of the coset Φstand 2,m + e J2,m.
On the other hand, the indices m = 14 and m = 15 are similar to the indices m = 6 and m = 10 looked at previously: here we ﬁnd optimal mock Jacobi forms of the form Φ2,14 = −2H | V(1) 2,14 −1 8 F14 , Φ2,15 = −2H | V(1) 2,15 −1 6 F15 , (9.28) where F14 and F15 are forms anti-invariant under Wp (p|m) with Fourier expansions of the form c(F14; n, r) = ( C(14)(56n −r2) for r ≡±1, ±3 or ±5 (mod 28), −C(14)(56n −r2) for r ≡±9, ±11, or ±13 (mod 28), (9.29) c(F15; n, r) = ( C(15)(60n −r2) for r ≡±1, ±2, ±4, or ±7 (mod 30), −C(15)(60n −r2) for r ≡±8, ±11, ±13, or ±14 (mod 30), (9.30) with coeﬃcients C14(∆) and C15(∆) given for small ∆by – 75 – ∆ −1 31 47 55 87 103 111 143 159 167 199 215 223 C(14)(∆) −1 3 10 15 15 30 42 20 51 65 51 85 120 , ∆ −1 11 44 56 59 71 104 116 119 131 164 176 179 C(15)(∆) −1 2 10 4 14 9 28 24 29 26 40 28 54 .
This pattern continues: as we continue to higher values, we ﬁnd that for each index M which is a product of an even number of distinct primes (i.e., for which µ(M) = 1, where µ( · ) denotes the M¨ obius function), we need to introduce a new function QM that is anti-invariant under Wp for all p dividing M, but that these functions and their images under Hecke-like operators then suﬃce to give possible choices for our special mock Jacobi forms in all indices, in the sense that the function Φ2,m = 1 2ω(m)−1 X M|m µ(M) = +1 QM | V(M) 2, m/M ( ω(m) := #{p | p prime, p|M} ) (9.31) belongs to the coset Φstand k,m + e J2,m for all m ≥1. (The factor 21−ω(m) will be explained below.) In fact more is true. The functions QM in (9.31) are simply the (−1, . . . , −1) eigencomponents of Φ2,M for some choice of these latter functions within their deﬁning cosets, and the various terms in (9.31) are the eigencomponents of Φ2,m for the involutions Wm1 (m1∥m). In other words, we have the following theorem: Theorem 9.1. For any choice of the mock Jacobi forms Φ2,m ∈Φstand 2,m + e J2,m (m ∈N), the eigencomponents Φε1,...,εr 2,m (m = Q i pνi i , εi = ±1, Q εi = +1) with respect to the decomposi-tion19 (4.41) are given by 1 2Φ2,m r Y i=1  1 + εiWpνi i  = QM V (M) 2,m/M  mod (J !
2,m ε1,...,εr , (9.32) where M is the product of the pi with εi = −1, QM is deﬁned by QM = 1 2Φ2,M Y p|M  1 −Wp  = 2ω(M)−1 Φ−,...,− 2,M (µ(M) = +1), (9.33) and V(M) 2,m/M is the Hecke-like operator deﬁned in (4.38). In particular, the decomposition (9.31) is always true modulo e J2,m, and if we choose the functions Φ2,M and consequently QM arbitrarily for all M with µ(M) = 1, then the function deﬁned by (9.31) gives an admissible choice of Φ2,m for all indices m ≥1.
19or rather, its analogue for elliptic forms – 76 – Examples. The functions QM for the ﬁrst few values of M with µ(M) = 1 are Q1 = −H , Q6 = −F6 12 , Q10 = −F10 6 , Q14 = −F14 4 , Q15 = −F15 3 , . . . , (9.34) where H, F6, . . . , F15 are the functions introduced in §7.2, §9.2, and this subsection.
(The reasons for the various normalizations, and for having two symbols FM and QM to denote proportional functions, will be discussed later.) We will prove Theorem 9.1 towards the end of this section by calculating the shadows of the mock Jacobi forms on the two sides of (9.32), since two mock Jacobi forms diﬀer by a true Jacobi form if and only if they have the same shadow.
Remarks. 1. We wrote  J !
2,m ε1,...,εr rather than e J ε1,...,εr 2,m in the theorem because of the fact mentioned in §4.4 that the involutions Wm1 do not preserve the space of weak Jacobi forms (or weak elliptic forms), so that the left-hand side of eq. (9.32) for an arbitrary choice of Φ2,m may contain monomials qnyr with n < 0. In fact, it will follow from the results given below that the functions Φ2,M can be chosen in such a way that the eigencomponents Φ−,··· ,− 2,M do not contain any negative powers of q, in which case the expression on the right-hand side of (9.31) really does lie in Φstand k,m + e J2,m as asserted, and not merely in Φstand k,m + J !
2,m.
2. An exactly similar statement is true for the functions Φ1,m, except that in that case we have Q i εi = −1 (because in odd weight Wm acts as multiplication by −1), so that the M that occur in the decomposition of Φ1,m are the divisors of m with µ(M) = −1, and the functions QM that occur in the decomposition of Φ1,M are deﬁned by QM = 1 2 Φ1,M Y p|M  1 −Wp  = 2ω(M)−1 Φ−,··· ,− 2,M (µ(M) = −1) (9.35) instead of equation (9.33). The reason for the factor 2ω(m)−1 in these two equations is now apparent: it is the minimal factor making QM an integral linear combination of images of Φk,m under Atkin-Lehner involutions. (We could remove one factor 2 because for each decomposi-tion M = M1M2, the two terms µ(M1)Φk,m|WM1 and µ(M2)Φk,m|WM2 are equal.) Theorem 9.1 explains the ﬁrst part of our observations, those connected with the eigen-component decomposition of the mock Jacobi forms Φ2,m and the fact that the collection of all of these functions can be expressed in terms of the special functions (9.34) and their images under Hecke-like operators. But it does not say anything about the orders of the poles of the functions in question, which was our original criterion for optimality. On the other hand, from the tables of Fourier coeﬃcients of the functions Q1, . . . , Q15 that we have given we see that, although none of these functions except Q1 is strongly holomorphic, each of them satisﬁes the only slightly weaker discriminant bound ∆:= 4mn −r2 ≥−1. This property will turn out to play a prominent role. We will call Jacobi or elliptic forms satisfying it forms with optimal – 77 – growth20, because their Fourier coeﬃcients grow more slowly than forms that do not obey this discriminant bound. We observe that any Jacobi or elliptic form having optimal growth is automatically a weak form, since 4nm −r2 ≥−1 implies n ≥0.
As we continued our computations to higher values of M, we were surprised to ﬁnd that this “optimal growth” property continued to hold for each M of the form pq (p and q distinct primes) up to 200. It followed that the full function Φ2,M could also be chosen to have optimal growth in these cases, since Φ2,M = Q1|V(1) 2,M + QM and the image of the strongly holomorphic form Q1 under V(1) 2,M is strongly holomorphic. This made it particularly interesting to look at the case m = 210, the ﬁrst product of four distinct primes, because in this case, even if the function Q210 = Φ−−−− 2,210 can be chosen to be have optimal growth, then the six middle terms in the decomposition (9.31), which here takes the form 8 Φ2,210 = Q1 | V(1) 2,210 + Q6 | V(6) 2,35 + Q10 | V(10) 2,21 + Q14 | V(14) 2,15 + Q15 | V(15) 2,14 + Q21 | V(21) 2,10 + Q35 | V(35) 2,6 + Q210 , (9.36) will not be. (Even if QM is chosen to have optimal growth, its image under the operator VM 2,t will in general satisfy only ∆≥−t2. For M of the form pq we had no problems with this because Q1, and hence also its image under V(1) 2,M, is actually holomorphic.) The corresponding computation was somewhat forbidding since the space e J2,210 of forms by which we can change the initial choice Φstand 2,210 has dimension 3815, and the conditions C(∆, r) = 0 for ∆< −1 give 3813 linear constraints, so that we have to ﬁnd the kernel of a roughly square matrix of size nearly 4000.
Moreover, the coeﬃcients of this matrix are gigantic, so that we have to work modulo some large prime. Nevertheless, this computation could be carried out (using PARI/GP), and it turned out that the function Q210 could again be chosen to have optimal growth! This solution is given by Q210 = −F210, where F210 = P ℓ(mod 420) hℓϑ210,ℓwith the Fourier coeﬃcients of the mock theta functions hℓgiven in Table 4. In this table, we have listed the values of ℓwith (ℓ, 210) = 1 and 0 ≤ℓ< 210 (since h420n±ℓ= hℓand hℓ= 0 for (ℓ, 210) > 1) in groups of 8, with hℓ= hℓ0 for the ﬁrst four and hℓ= −hℓ0 for the second four, where ℓ0 (shown in boldface) belongs to {1, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23} and hℓ0 = P n≥0 C(n) qn−ℓ2 0/840. Thus, the third line of the table means that h±13 = h±43 = · · · = −h±167 = −h±197 = q−169/840 6q + 17q2 + 17q3 + . . .
 . A striking property of these coeﬃcients is that they are so small: for instance, the largest value of c(n, ℓ) in the table is c(12, 1) = 121, with corresponding discriminant ∆= 4 · 210 · 12 −12 = 10079, while for the Mathieu form h(2) the table following eq. (7.31) gave the much larger coeﬃcient 132825 20An alternative name would be “forms with only simple poles” because the forms hℓ(τ) = P ∆C(∆, ℓ) q∆/4m have no singularity worse than q−1/4m as q →0, i.e., they have at most simple poles with respect to the local parameter q1/4m at τ = i∞. However, this terminology would be dangerous because it could also suggest simple poles with respect to z. Another reasonable name would be “nearly holomorphic,” but this terminology also carries a risk of confusion since “almost holomorphic” is already a standard notation for modular forms which are polynomials in 1/τ2 with holomorphic coeﬃcients.
– 78 – ℓwith hℓ= hℓ0 ℓwith hℓ= −hℓ0 n = 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1, 29, 41, 71 139, 169, 181, 209 −2 13 28 34 49 46 71 59 83 77 102 87 121 11, 31, 59, 101 109, 151, 179, 199 0 9 21 27 36 41 51 44 75 62 62 82 104 13, 43, 83, 97 113, 127, 167, 197 0 6 17 17 35 20 49 31 57 36 77 32 94 17, 53, 67, 73 137, 143, 157, 193 0 4 12 16 22 19 43 17 40 50 41 27 87 19, 61, 79, 89 121, 131, 149, 191 0 3 11 12 23 14 37 17 43 28 45 30 77 23, 37, 47, 103 107, 163, 173, 187 0 1 7 4 20 −1 32 3 30 10 50 −16 63 Table 4: Fourier coeﬃcients of the function F210 for the much smaller discriminant 4 · 2 · 9 −12 = 71. This behavior is a direct consequence of the “optimal growth” property together with the fact that the index is large (cf. Theorem 9.3 below and the discussion in §9.5).
In fact, in this example even more happens: not only the function Q210 = Φ−−−− 2,210 , but the whole function Φ2,M (and hence each of its eigencomponents Φ±±±± 2,210 ) can be chosen to have optimal growth. It turns out that this statement holds for all square-free indices m, whether they have an even or an odd number of prime factors. If m is not square-free, then this is not true in general,21 but it becomes true after a very small modiﬁcation of the functions in question: Theorem 9.2. The functions {Φ2,m}m≥1 can be chosen to have the form Φ2,m(τ, z) = X d2|m Φ0 2,m/d2(τ, dz) (9.37) where {Φ0 2,m}m≥1 are primitive mock Jacobi forms having optimal growth.
Corollary. The functions {QM}M>1, µ(M)=1 can be chosen to have optimal growth.
(Here we have excluded the case M = 1 because the function Q1 = −H has already been chosen to have no poles at all.) Tables of Fourier coeﬃcients of the functions QM appearing in the corollary for M ≤50 are given in Appendix A.1.
If we denote by EOG m the space of elliptic forms of index m (cf. §4.4) having optimal growth, then we have the sequence of inclusions E0 m ⊂Em ⊂EOG m ⊂e Em ⊂E!
m  ϕ ∈EOG m ⇐ ⇒ DEF Cϕ(∆, ℓ) = 0 if ∆< −1  of spaces of diﬀerent types of elliptic forms (cusp, holomorphic, optimal growth, weak, weakly holomorphic) with diﬀerent orders of growth. Theorem 9.2 says that we can represent all of our 21It is true if and only if m is the product of a square-free number and a prime power.
– 79 – functions in terms of new, “primitive,” forms Φ0 m ∈EOG m for all m. The function Φ0 m is unique up to the addition of an element of the space JOG 2,m = EOG m ∩e J2,m of Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index m of optimal growth. We will study this latter space in the next subsection.
Theorem 9.2 has an immediate consequence for the growth of the Fourier coeﬃcients of the optimal choice of Φ2,m, since the Hardy-Ramanujan circle method implies that the Fourier coeﬃcients of a weakly holomorphic Jacobi (or mock Jacobi) form grow asymptoti-cally like eπ√ ∆|∆0|/m, where ∆0 is the minimal value of the discriminants occurring in the form.
We give a more precise version of this statement in the special case of forms of weight 2 having optimal growth.
Theorem 9.3. Let ϕ be a weak or mock Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m with optimal growth. Then the Fourier coeﬃcients of ϕ satisfy the asymptotic formula Cϕ(∆, r) = κr eπ √ ∆/m + O  eπ √ ∆/2m (9.38) as ∆→∞, where the coeﬃcient κr = κ(ϕ; r) is given by κr = − X ℓ(mod 2m) ℓ2 ≡1 (mod 4m) Cϕ(−1, ℓ) cos πℓr m  .
(9.39) Proof. We only sketch the proof, since it is a standard application of the circle method. We write the coeﬃcient cϕ(∆, r) as a Fourier integral R 1 2 +iε −1 2 +iε hr(τ) e(−∆τ/4m) dτ , with hℓdeﬁned by (4.9) and (4.10). Its value is unchanged if we replace hr(τ) by its completion b hr(τ), since they diﬀer only by terms with negative discriminant The main contribution to the integral comes from a neighbourhood of τ = 0, where we can estimate b hr(τ) to high accuracy as b hr(τ) = −(i/τ)3/2 √ 2m X ℓ(mod 2m) e  rℓ 2m  b hℓ  −1 τ  = −κr √ 2m (i/τ)3/2 e  1 4mτ  + O  τ 1/2 , the ﬁrst equation holding by the S-transformation equation ([57], p. 59) and the second because the “optimal growth” assumption implies that b hℓ(−1/τ) = Cϕ(−1, ℓ) e(1/4mτ)+O(1) as τ →0 and the contribution from the Eichler integral of the shadow of b hℓis at most O(1/τ). The rest follows by a standard calculation, the only point worthy of note being that since the hℓ’s have weight 3/2 the Bessel functions that typically arise in the circle method are simple exponentials here.
It is interesting to compare the statement of Theorem 9.3 with the tables given in the Appendix. This will be discussed in more detail in §9.5.
– 80 – 9.4 Optimal choice of the function Φ2,m As we already saw, Theorem 9.2 ﬁxes the choice of the mock Jacobi form Φ0 2,m up to the addition of an element of the space JOG 2,m of Jacobi forms of weight 2 and index m having optimal growth.
The structure of this latter space is described by the following theorem, proved in §10.
Theorem 9.4. The quotient JOG 2,m/J2,m has dimension 1 for every m. An element Km ∈JOG 2,m representing a non-trivial element of this quotient space can be chosen to satisfy Km(τ, z) = y −2 + y−1 + O(q) ∈C[y, y−1][[q]] , and then has polar coeﬃcients given by C(Km; ∆, r) = ( 1 if ∆= −1, r2 ≡1 (mod 4m) , 0 if ∆< −1 .
(9.40) The function Km can be chosen to be primitive and invariant under all the operators Wm1 (m1∥m).
The choice of Km described in the theorem is unique up to the addition of a primitive holomorphic Jacobi form invariant under all Wm operators. This ﬁrst occurs for m = 25, so Km is unique for small values of m. Because of Theorem 9.4, the function Φ0 m has only a very small amount of choice: we can change it without disturbing the “optimal growth” property by adding an arbitrary multiple of Km and an arbitrary holomorphic Jacobi form, but this is the only freedom we have. In particular, we have three special choices of “optimal” Φ0 2,m, each unique for m < 25, corresponding to the three that we already encountered for m = 6 and m = 10 in §9.2: (I) The (+, · · · , +)-eigencomponent of Φ0,I 2,m is strongly holomorphic.
(II) Φ0,II 2,m has c(0, 1) = 0.
(III) Φ0,III 2,m has c(0, 0) = 0.
Each of these three choices has certain advantages over the other ones. In case (I) we can choose Φ0,I 2,m within its class modulo J0 2,m so that its (+, · · · , +)-eigencomponent is precisely equal to 21−ω(m)Q1|V(1) 2,m and hence has Fourier coeﬃcients expressible in terms of class numbers, like in the examples for small m that we already saw. Also, Φ0,I 2,m is strongly holomorphic when m is a prime power, so that this is certainly the best of the three choices in that special case.
The function occurring in (II) has a Fourier expansion beginning 1 12(m + 1) + O(q), and the corresponding ψ0,II m+1 satisﬁes (9.15) and belongs to the family of the weight zero, index m Jacobi forms discussed in [66]. The choice (III) looks at ﬁrst sight like the least natural of the three, – 81 – since it might seem strange to insist on killing a ∆= 0 term when there are ∆= −1 terms that are more singular, but in fact it is the nicest in some ways, since it can be further improved by the addition of a holomorphic Jacobi form to have all of its ∆= 0 coeﬃcients equal to zero, and its polar coeﬃcients are then given by an elegant formula, which we now state.
Theorem 9.5. The mock Jacobi form Φ0,III 2,m in Theorem 9.2 can be chosen, uniquely up to the addition of a Jacobi cusp form of weight 2 and index m, so that all its Fourier coeﬃcients with ∆= 0 vanish. Its polar coeﬃcients are then given by C(Φ0,III 2,m ; −1, r) = 1 24 X d2|m µ(d)  r −1 2 , m d2  +  r + 1 2 , m d2  for r2 ≡1 (mod 4m).
(9.41) Moreover, the function Φ0,III 2,m can be chosen to be primitive without aﬀecting these properties.
This also gives a multiplicative formula for the polar coeﬃcients of all eigencomponents of Φ0,III 2,m : Corollary. Write m = Qs i=1 Pi, where Pi = pνi i with distinct primes pi and exponents νi ≥1.
Then for any εi ∈{±1} with ε1 · · · εs = 1, we have C  Φ0,III 2,m s Y i=1  1 + εiWPi  ; −1, r  = ±1 12 s Y i=1 ( (pi + εi) if νi = 1, (pνi i −pνi−2 i ) if νi ≥2, (9.42) where the sign is the product of the εi for all i for which r ≡−1 (mod 2Pi). In particular, for the functions QM (M > 1, µ(M) = 1), chosen by the Corollary to Theorem 9.2 to have optimal growth, the Fourier coeﬃcients with non-positive discriminant are given by C(QM; ∆, r) =    0 if ∆= 0 , ±ϕ(M) 24 if ∆= −1 , (9.43) where in the second line r2 ≡1 (mod 4M) and the sign is determined by µ(( r+1 2 , M)) = ±1.
The ﬁnal statement of the corollary can be compared with the examples in (9.34), in which each of the FM’s occurring (for M > 1) was normalized with C(FM; −1, 1) = −1, and the numerical factor relating QM and FM equals −ϕ(M)/24 in each case. To give a feeling for the nature of these functions in general, and as an illustration of the formulas in Theorem 9.5 and its corollary, we give in Table 5 below the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients C(Φ; ∆, ℓ) for these and some related functions Φ for m = 25 (the ﬁrst index where J2,m ̸= {0} and hence Km is not unique), m = 37 (the ﬁrst index where J0 2,m ̸= {0} and hence Φ0,III 2,m is not unique), m = 50 (the ﬁrst case where (9.42) is non-trivial), and m = 91 (the ﬁrst case where where J0,−− 2,m ̸= {0} and hence Qm is not unique). The free coeﬃcients “a”, “b” and “c” in the table arise because – 82 – ∆ −1 0 4 11 16 19 24 31 ±ℓ(mod 50) 1 0 10 20 14 17 22 9 24 13 K25 1 −2 a 1 −a 1 −a 1 + 2a 2 + 3a 2 −4a 5 −2a 3 + 2a Φ0,III 2,25 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 −1 2 1 Φ0,I 2,25 0 2 c −1 −c −1 −c 2c 3c −3 −4c −3 −2c −2 + 2c ∆ −1 0 3 4 7 11 12 16 27 28 ±ℓ(mod 74) 1 0 21 12 17 27 32 24 11 34 K37 1 −2 a a 1 −a 1 + a 2 −a 2 −2a 1 −3a 2 + 3a Φ0,III 2,37 19 12 0 b −1 6 + b 1 4 −b 11 12 + b 3 2 −b 1 −2b −3 4 −3b 13 6 + 3b Φ0,I 2,37 0 19 6 c −1 6 + c −4 3 −c −2 3 + c −5 3 −c −13 6 −2c −7 3 −3c −1 + 3c ∆ −1 0 4 16 24 31 36 39 ±ℓ(mod 100) 1 49 0 20 40 14 28 24 13 37 42 19 K50 1 1 −2 a 1 −a −a 1 + a 1 −2a 1 + 2a 1 + 2a 2 + 3a −2a Φ0,III 2,50 |(1 + W2) 3 3 0 0 0 −2 2 −2 3 3 8 −1 Φ0,III 2,50 |(1 −W2) 1 −1 0 0 0 0 0 0 −1 1 0 −1 ∆ −1 3 12 27 40 48 55 68 75 ±ℓ(mod 182) 1 / 27 19 / 33 38 / 66 57 / 83 18 / 60 50 / 76 71 / 85 32 / 46 17 / 87 Q91 3 a −1 + a −1 −2a −1 −3a −2 + 2a 3a 1 + 3a −5 + 2a Table 5: Examples of non-unique Jacobi and mock Jacobi forms dim J2,25 = dim J0 2,37 = dim J2,50 = dim J0 2,91 = 1. In the case of m = 91 we show the two ℓ-values corresponding to each value of ∆in the format ℓ/ ℓ∗and give in the following line the Fourier coeﬃcient C(Q91; ∆, ℓ) = −C(Q91; ∆, ℓ∗). In the cases of m = 25 and m = 37, we have given the (non-unique) holomorphic mock Jacobi form Φ0,I 2,2m as well as Φ0,III 2,2m.
In summary, the “optimal growth” property of Φ0 2,m and the near-uniqueness of the Jacobi form Km have permitted us to pin down both of these functions in many cases, but there still remains an additive ambiguity whenever there are Jacobi cusp forms. We do not know how to resolve this ambiguity in general, and state this as an open problem: Question: Is there a canonical choice of the forms Km and QM for all positive integers m and all positive square-free integers M ?
Should the answer to either of these questions be positive, the corresponding forms would be of considerable interest. In particular, one can speculate that the canonical choice of QM, if it exists, might be canonically associated to the quaternion algebra of discriminant M, since there is a natural bijection between positive square-free integers and quaternion algebras over Q, with – 83 – the latter being indeﬁnite or indeﬁnite according as µ(M) = 1 (corresponding to our k = 2 forms and to mock theta functions of weight 3/2) or µ(M) = −1 (corresponding to k = 1 and to mock theta functions of weight 1/2).
We end this subsection by describing one possible approach to answering the above question that we tried. This approach was not successful in the sense that, although it did produce a speciﬁc choice for Km and Φ0 2,m (or Φ0 1,m), these did not seem to have arithmetic coeﬃcients and therefore had to be rejected, but the method of calculation involves a result that is of interest in its own right and may be useful in other contexts. The idea is to ﬁx the choice of the Jacobi forms (or mock Jacobi forms) in question by demanding that they (or their completions) be orthogonal to Jacobi cusp forms with respect to the Petersson scalar product. (As an analogy, imagine that one wanted to determine the position of E12 = 1 + · · · in M12 = C E3 4 + C ∆ but did not know how to compute the Fourier expansion of P(mτ + n)−12 . Then one could simply write E12 = E3 4 + a∆and use the orthogonality of Eisenstein series and cusp forms to compute the number a = −432000/691 numerically as −(E3 4, ∆)/(∆, ∆), where ( , ) denotes the Petersson scalar product.) To apply this idea, we need a good way to compute the Petersson scalar product of Jacobi forms. This is the result of independent interest referred to above. For simplicity, we state it only in the case k = 2.
Theorem 9.6. Let ϕ1 and ϕ2 be two Jacobi cusp forms of weight 2 and index m, and set A(∆) = X ℓ(mod 4m) Cϕ1(∆, ℓ) Cϕ2(∆, ℓ) , H(t) = ∞ X ∆=1 A(∆)/ √ ∆ exp(2π p t∆/m) −1 .
(9.44) Then the function tH(t) −H(1/t) t −1 (t ̸= 1) has a constant value cH which is proportional22 to the Petersson scalar product (ϕ1, ϕ2).
Sketch of proof: We refer to [57] for the deﬁnition of (ϕ1, ϕ2) (eq. (13), p. 27) and for its expres-sion as a simple multiple of P ℓ(h(1) ℓ, h(2) ℓ), where h(1) ℓ and h(2) ℓ are the coeﬃcients in the theta expansions of ϕ1 and ϕ2 (Theorem 5.3, p. 61). Calculating these weight 3/2 scalar products by the Rankin-Selberg method as explained in §3.1, we ﬁnd that (ϕ1, ϕ2) can be expressed as a simple multiple of the residue at s = 3/2 of the Dirichlet series L(s) = P ∆>0 A(∆)∆−s. The Rankin-Selberg method also shows that the function e L(s) = 2 (2π)−sms Γ(2s) ζ(2s) L(s + 1 2) has a meromorphic continuation to all s, with poles only at s = 0 and s = 1, and is invariant under s →1−s. But e L(s) is simply the Mellin transform of H(t), so this implies the proposition by a standard argument.
□ A rather surprising aspect of this theorem is that it is actually easier to compute Petersson scalar products for Jacobi forms than it is for ordinary modular forms of integral weight. In 22The exact constant of proportionality plays no role for our purposes, since we will only be concerned with ratios of Petersson scalar products. If the scalar product is normalized as in [57], its value is 1/2.
– 84 – that case the analogue of H(t) would have an inﬁnite sum of K-Bessel functions multiplying each coeﬃcient A(∆), whereas here the Bessel functions are replaced by simple exponentials (because the modular forms h(i) ℓ have half-integral weight, so that the usual gamma factor Γ(s)Γ(k + s −1) in the Rankin-Selberg method becomes a single gamma function Γ(2s)) and at the same time the inﬁnite sum becomes a geometric series that can be summed explicitly.
To apply the proposition to our situation in the case of K37, we start with an initial choice (like the one given in Table 5) and replace it by K37 + aϕ37, where ϕ37 is the generator of J0 2,37 (normalized by C(ϕ37 ; 3, 21) = 1) and where a ∈R is chosen to make this function orthogonal to ϕ37, i.e., a = −(K37, ϕ37)/(ϕ37, ϕ37), in the hope that this a will be an integer or simple rational number. (Of course K37 is not a cusp form, but the integral deﬁning the Petersson scalar product still converges,23 the sum deﬁning H(t) converges for t > 1 148 by Theorem 9.3, and Theorem 9.6 still holds.24) The numerical calculation for the case ϕ1 = ϕ2 = ϕ37 gives the value cH = c1 = −0.95284748097797917403 (a value that can be checked independently, since up to a factor −π it must be equal to the even period of the elliptic curve y2 −y = x3 −x, as calculated by GP-PARI as ellinit([0,0,1,-1,0])[15]). The corresponding number for ϕ1 = ϕ37 and ϕ2 = K37 (with K37 chosen as in Table 5, with a = 0) is c2 = 0.26847600706319893417, which is not a simple multiple of c1, but when we calculate again with ϕ2 = Φ0,III 2,37 (again as in Table 5, with b = 0) we ﬁnd a value c3 = 0.107471184190738587618 that is related to the two previous values by 12c3 −19c2 = 4c1 numerically to high precision. Thus in this case we have indeed found a form orthogonal to cusp forms and with rational coeﬃcients. This at ﬁrst looks promising, but in fact has a simple and disappointing explanation: the linear combination Φ0,III 2,37 −19 12K37−1 3ϕ37 = Φ0,I 2,37−1 3ϕ37 is nothing other than Q1|V37 (as one can see in Table 5, where setting c = −1 3 gives entries equal to −H(∆)), and since the function Q1 = −H is constructed from an Eisenstein series, albeit a non-holomorphic one, it is automatically orthogonal to all cusp forms. And indeed, when we look at the case of Q91 and ϕ91 ∈J0,−− 2,91 , where there are no Eisenstein series in sight, then the calculation of the quotient ( b Q91, ϕ91)/(ϕ91, ϕ91) failed to yield a simple number. (The non-holomorphy of b Q91 does not aﬀect the application of Theorem 9.6, since its non-holomorphic part has Fourier coeﬃcients only for ∆< 0, where the coeﬃcients of ϕ91 vanish.) As an incidental remark, we mention that the cusp form ϕ37, whose ﬁrst few 23The precise condition needed for the convergence of the Petersson scalar product of two weakly holomorphic Jacobi forms ϕ1 and ϕ2 is that ord∞(h(1) ℓ) + ord∞(h(2) ℓ) > 0 for all ℓ∈Z/2mZ. This is amply satisﬁed in the case ϕ1 = ϕ37, ϕ2 = K37, since the only negative value of ord∞(h(2) ℓ) is −1/148 for ℓ≡±1 (mod 74), and there ord∞(h(1) ℓ) = 147/148.
24The proof given above breaks down, since the numbers A(∆) grow exponentially in √ ∆, so that the Dirich-let series P ∆A(∆)/∆s does not converge for any value of s, but the function f(y) = y3/2 P ∆A(∆)e−π∆y/m, which is the constant term of an SL(2, Z)-invariant function that is small at inﬁnity, still has a Mellin trans-form with a meromorphic continuation to all s, and if we deﬁne e L(s) as the product of this Mellin transform with π−sΓ(s)ζ(2s), then e L(s) has the same analytic properties as before and its inverse Mellin transform H(t) is still given by the sum in (9.44) for t suﬃciently large and satisﬁes the same functional equation.
– 85 – Fourier coeﬃcients were obtained only with diﬃculty in [57] (pp. 118–120 and 145), can now be obtained very easily using the “theta blocks” of [69] as ϕ37(τ, z) = 1 η(τ)6 10 Y i=1 ϑ(τ, aiz) , (a1, . . . , a10) = (1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5) , and similarly ϕ2,91 can be obtained easily as the diﬀerence of the two similarly deﬁned theta blocks for the 10-tuples (a1, . . . , a10) = (1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 6, 7) and (1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8).
9.5 Observations on the weight one family, integrality, and positivity In the last two subsections we discussed experimental properties of the family of weight 2 mock Jacobi forms that were introduced in §9.1 and formulated a number of general results that will be proved in §10. In this subsection we report on the experimental data for the weight 1 family and discuss various properties of both families that play a role in connection with other investigations in mathematics and physics (like “Umbral Moonshine”) or that seem to be of independent interest.
The discussion of the weight 1 family is quite diﬀerent in nature from that of the weight 2 case, because here there do not seem to be general structural results as there were there, but only a small number of special functions for small values of the index having nice properties. In particular, the analogue of Theorem 9.2 no longer holds, and we ﬁnd instead that (at least up to m = 100, and presumably for all m) the appropriately deﬁned primitive mock Jacobi forms Φ0 1,m can be chosen to have optimal growth only for the indices m = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 25 .
(9.45) Similarly, although the analogue of Theorem 9.1 is still valid in the weight 1 case (now with the special mock Jacobi forms QM labelled by square-free integers M having an odd rather than an even number of prime factors), the functions QM can apparently be chosen to have optimal growth only for M = 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 30, 42, 70, 78 .
(9.46) (This list has a precise mathematical interpretation; see 3. below.) Thus here a small number of special examples is singled out. Interestingly enough, these turn out to include essentially all of the special mock theta functions that have been studied in the literature in the past.
For convenience, we divide up our discussion into several topics.
– 86 – 1. Optimal choices for the weight one family As in the weight 2 case, we begin our discussion by looking at small values of m. We will consider the original forms Φ1,m ﬁrst, starting with the “standard” choices (9.2) and trying to modify them by the addition of weak Jacobi forms to attain the property of having optimal growth. Actually, it is better to look at the primitive mock Jacobi forms, now deﬁned by Φ0 1,m ≡ X d2|m µ(d) d Φ1,m/d2|Ud , Φ1,m ≡ X d2|m 1 d Φ0 1,m/d2|Ud (mod e J1,m) , (9.47) instead of (9.37) and (10.52), for the same reason for which we introduced the functions Φ0 2,m in §9.3: residue arguments similar to those that we will give in §10 for the weight 2 case show here that Φ1,m can never have optimal growth unless it agrees with Φ0 1,m (which happens if and only if m is square-free or the square of a prime number), so that the latter class is certain to be more productive. Finally, we will look at the forms QM where M is a product of an odd number of distinct prime factors, since according to Theorem 9.1 all of the forms Φ1,m can be constructed from these. Unlike the situation for k = 2, here we do not have to worry about any choices, because of the following theorem (to be compared with Lemma 2.3 of [25] and to be proved, like all its companions, in §10) and corollary. The only issue is therefore whether the “optimal growth” condition can be fulﬁlled at all.
Theorem 9.7. There are no weight one weak Jacobi forms of optimal growth.
Corollary. If any of the mock Jacobi forms Φ1,m, Φ0 1,m, or QM (µ(M) = −1) can be chosen to have optimal growth, then that choice is unique.
We now look at some small individual indices. For m=1 there is nothing to discuss, since the function Φst 1,1 = (C/2A)F vanishes identically, as already explained in §8.5 (Example 1).
(This, by the way, is the reason why Φ1,m = Φ0 1,m when m is the square of a prime.) The case of m=2 has also already been treated in the same place (Example 2), where we saw that ϕopt 1,2 = B 24 A C , Φopt 1,2 = −1 24 F2 , (9.48) with F2 the mock modular form deﬁned in §7 and related to the Mathieu moonshine story.
For m=3, we ﬁnd that the (unique) choice of Φ1,m having optimal growth is given by ϕopt 1,3 = B2 −E4A2 288A C , Φopt 1,3 = ϕopt 1,3 −A1,3 = 1 12 F3 , (9.49) where the normalizing factor 1/12 has been chosen to give F3 integral Fourier coeﬃcients.
These coeﬃcients are determined by virtue of their periodicity and oddness by the values C(3)(∆) = C(F3; ∆, r) for r ∈{1, 2}, the ﬁrst few values of C(3)(∆) being given by ∆ −1 8 11 20 23 32 35 44 47 56 59 C(3)(∆) −1 10 16 44 55 110 144 280 330 572 704 .
– 87 – (A more extensive table of these coeﬃcients, listed separately for the two values r = 1 and r = 2, is given in Appendix A.2, where we also give the corresponding values for the other forms treated here, so that we no longer will give tables of coeﬃcients in the text.) For m=4 and m=5, the functions Φ1,m can again be chosen (of course uniquely, by the corollary above) to have optimal growth, the corresponding meromorphic Jacobi forms ϕopt 1,4 and ϕopt 1,5 being given by B3 −3E4A2B + 2E6A3 2 · 122 A C and B4 −6E4A2B2 + 8E6A3B −3E2 4A4 2 · 123 A C , (9.50) respectively. Note that in the case of m = 4, according to the decomposition result given in Theorem 9.1, we could also make the choice Q2|V(2) 1,2 for the function Φ1,4, but then it would have the worse discriminant bound ∆min = −4. We also observe that, although 4 is not square-free, we do not have to distinguish between Φ1,m and Φ0 1,m here, because they diﬀer by the function Φ0 1,1|U2 and the function Φ1,1 vanishes identically.
It is now very striking that the numerators of the fractions in (9.49) and (9.50) are the same as the expressions that we already saw in eqs. (9.10), (9.11) and (9.12) in §9.2, meaning that for these values of m we have ϕopt 1,m = C A ψopt 0,m−1 = C ϕopt 2,m−2 (9.51) with the same weight 0 weak Jacobi modular forms ψopt 0,m−1 as were tabulated in Table 2.
The same thing happens for several other small values of the index.
We do not know the deeper reason (if any) for this coincidence, but merely remark that the weight 0 weak Jacobi forms obtained from the weight 1 meromorphic Jacobi forms in our family by dividing by C also play a prominent role in the recent work of Cheng, Duncan and Harvey [25] on “umbral moonshine,” and also that the the forms ψopt 0,m occur in a somewhat diﬀerent context in earlier work of Gritsenko[66] related to Borcherds products, as was already mentioned in §9.3 when we introduced the “second standard choice” Φ0,II 2,m of the primitive mock Jacobi form Φ0 2,m.
Continuing to larger values, we look ﬁrst at primes, since for m prime the three functions of interest Φ1,m, Φ0 1,m and Qm all coincide. For m=7 we ﬁnd that Q7 = Φopt 1,7 again has optimal growth and again satisﬁes (9.51) with ϕopt 0,6 as given in Table 2. However, for m=11 the function QM cannot be chosen to be of optimal growth; the best possible choice, shown in the table A.3 in the appendix, has minimal discriminant −4. For m=13 the function Q13 again has optimal growth and is again given by (9.51), but for larger primes this never seems to happen again, the minimal value of ∆for the optimal choices of QM for the ﬁrst few prime indices being given by M 2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 ∆min 1 1 1 1 4 1 4 4 8 5 8 4 .
The next simplest case is m = p2, since here Φ1,m is still primitive. For m=9 and m=25 this function can be chosen to have optimal growth, but apparently not after that. The following – 88 – case to look at is m = pν with ν ≥2, since here the eigendecomposition (9.31) of Φ1,m is trivial.
(The eigenvalue of Wm must be −1 because the weight is odd, so Φ1,m = Φ− 1,m = Qp|V(p) pν−1.) Here we ﬁnd optimal growth only for m=8 and m=16.
Next, for M square-free but not prime, where the decomposition (9.2) is trivial, the only two cases giving optimal growth seem to be m=6 and m=10. And ﬁnally, for M neither square-free nor a power of a prime we also ﬁnd two examples m=12 and m=18. Altogether this leads to the list (9.45) given above. The ﬁrst few coeﬃcients of the forms Φ0 1,m for all of these values of m are tabulated in Appendix A.2.
However, this is not the end of the story. If Φ1,m has optimal growth for some m, then of course all of its eigencomponents with respect to the Atkin-Lehner operators also do, but the converse is not true, so there still can be further square-free values of M for which the function QM = 21−ω(M) Φ−,...,− 1,M has optimal growth, and this indeed happens. Since primes have already been treated and products of ﬁve or more primes are beyond the range of our ability to compute, we should consider products of three primes. Here we ﬁnd four examples, for the indices 30 = 2 · 3 · 5 , 42 = 2 · 3 · 7 , 70 = 2 · 5 · 7 , 78 = 2 · 3 · 13 , but for no other values less than 200 (and probably for no other values at all), giving the list (9.46). Again the Fourier coeﬃcients of the corresponding forms, as well as those for all other M < 150 of the form p1p2p3, have been listed in the appendix (part A.3). These examples are of particular interest, for a reason to which we now turn.
2. Relationship to classical mock theta functions Recall from §7.1 that a mock modular form is called a mock theta function if its shadow is a unary theta series, and that this deﬁnition really does include all of Ramanujan’s original mock theta functions that began the whole story. The theta expansion coeﬃcients hℓ(τ) of our special mock Jacobi forms Φ1,m and Φ2,m are always mock theta functions, since their shadows are multiples of the unary theta series ϕ1 m,ℓand ϕ0 m,ℓ, respectively. In fact, it turns out that many of our examples actually coincide with the mock theta functions studied by Ramanujan and his successors. This is the “particular interest” just mentioned.
Let us consider ﬁrst the case m=30, the ﬁrst of our QM examples with composite M.
Because it is so highly composite, there are very few orbits of the group of Atkin-Lehner involutions on the group of residue classes modulo 2m and hence very few components in the theta decomposition of Q30. In fact there are only two, so that up to sign we get only two distinct coeﬃcients h1 and h7 and Q30 has a decomposition −3 Q30 = h1  ϑ30,1 + ϑ30,11 + ϑ30,19 + ϑ30,29 −ϑ30,31 −ϑ30,41 −ϑ30,49 −ϑ30,59  + h7  ϑ30,7 + ϑ30,13 + ϑ30,17 + ϑ30,23 −ϑ30,37 −ϑ30,43 −ϑ30,47 −ϑ30,53  .
– 89 – (The normalizing factor −3 is included for convenience: the function −3Q30 is the function F30 deﬁned in 9.52 below.) The mock theta functions h1 and h7 have Fourier expansions beginning h1(τ) = q−1/120 (−1 + q + q2 + 2q3 + q4 + 3q5 + · · · ) , h7(τ) = q71/120 (1 + 2q + 2q2 + 3q3 + 3q4 + 4q5 + · · · ) .
These expansions are easily recognized: up to trivial modiﬁcations they are two of the “mock theta functions of order 5” in the original letter of Ramanujan to Hardy, namely 2 + q1/120 h1(τ) = χ1(q) = ∞ X n=0 qn (1 −qn+1) · · · (1 −q2n) , q−71/120 h2(τ) = χ2(q) = ∞ X n=0 qn (1 −qn+1) · · · (1 −q2n+1) .
(Actually, Ramanujan gave ﬁve pairs of mock theta functions of “order 5” in his letter, any two diﬀering from one another by weakly holomorphic modular forms, but it was pointed out in [129] that of the ﬁve associated pairs of mock modular forms only (q−1/120(2 −χ1(q)), q71/120χ2(q)) has the property that its completion transforms as a vector-valued modular form for the full modular group.) For m=42, exactly the same thing happens, and the three distinct components h1, h5 and h11 of Q42, whose initial coeﬃcients are tabulated in Appendix A.3, turn out to be, up to powers of q and signs, identical with Ramanujan’s three “order 7” mock theta functions F7,i (i = 1, 2, 3) that were given as our ﬁrst examples of mock modular forms in §7.1. What’s more, this behavior continues: in [129] it was mentioned that one could construct mock theta functions of arbitrary prime25 “order” p generalizing these two examples as quotients by η(τ)3 of certain weight 2 indeﬁnite theta series, and an explicit example M11,j(τ) = 1 η(τ)3 X m>2|n|/11 n≡j (mod 11) −4 m  12 n   m sgn(n) −n 6  qm2/8−n2/264 (j ∈Z/11Z) was given for p = 11. Computing the beginnings of the Fourier expansions of these ﬁve mock theta functions (only ﬁve rather than eleven because M11,j = −M11,−j) and comparing with the table in Appendix A.3, we ﬁnd perfect agreement with the coeﬃcients in the theta expansion of Q66, the ﬁrst example in that table of a form that is not of optimal growth.
This discussion thus clariﬁes the precise mathematical meaning of the number designated by Ramanujan as the “order” of his mock theta functions, but which he never deﬁned: it is indeed related to the level of the completions of the corresponding mock modular forms, as was clear from the results of Zwegers and other authors who have studied these functions, but it 25actually, only (p, 6) = 1 is needed – 90 – is even more closely related to the index of the mock Jacobi forms that have these mock theta functions as the coeﬃcients of its theta expansion.
Of course the above cases are not the only ones where there is a relationship between the special mock Jacobi forms QM and classically treated mock theta functions, but merely the ones where the relationship between the “order” and the index is clearest. Without giving any further details, we say only that Ramanujan’s order 3 functions are related in a similar way26 to our Q3 and that his order 10 functions (not given in his letter to Hardy, but contained in the so-called “Lost Notebook”) are related to Q5. We also refer once again to the beautiful recent work of Cheng, Duncan and Harvey [25] on “umbral moonshine,” in which many of these same functions are discussed in detail in connection with representations of special ﬁnite groups.
Finally, we should mention that all of Ramanujan’s functions were q-hypergeometric series but that in general no q-hypergeometric expression for the theta expansion coeﬃcients of the functions Φk,m or QM is known. This seems to be an interesting subject for further research.
One could look in particular for representations of this sort for the functions Q13 and Φ0 1,25 as given in Table A.2, since these have particularly small and smoothly growing coeﬃcients that suggest that such a representation, if it exists, might not be too complicated. It would also be reasonable to look at Q70 and Q78, the only two other known weight 1 examples with optimal growth.
3. Integrality of the Fourier coeﬃcients In Subsections 9.2 and 9.3 and above, we encountered several examples of functions QM of optimal growth that after multiplication by a suitable factor gave a function FM having all or almost all of the following nice arithmetic properties: (A) All Fourier coeﬃcients C(FM; ∆, r) are integral.
(B) The polar Fourier coeﬃcient C(FM; −1, 1) equals −1.
(C) The non-polar Fourier coeﬃcients C(FM; ∆, r) have a sign depending only on r.
(D) C(FM; ∆, r) is always positive for r = rmin, the smallest positive number whose square equals −∆(mod 4m).
In particular, for k = 2 this occurred for M = 6, 10, 14 and 15 (compare eqs. (7.28), (9.22), (9.29) and (9.30), which describe the coeﬃcients C(M)(∆) = C(FM; ∆, rmin) for these indices) and for k = 1, for the values M = 2, 3, 5, 7, 13 and 30 (with “non-negative” instead of “positive” in (C) in the case of M = 13), as well as for the functions Φ0 1,m for the prime powers M = 4, 8, 9, 16 and 25 (again with “positive” replaced by “non-positive,” and also allowing half-integral values for the Fourier coeﬃcients with ∆= 0). It is natural to ask for what values 26but not “on the nose,” for instance, our function h3,1 diﬀers from Ramanujan’s 3rd order mock theta function −3 q1/12f(q2) by an eta product.
– 91 – of M these properties can be expected to hold. We will discuss properties (A) and (B) here and properties (C) and (D) in point 4. below.
Clearly either (A) or (B) can always be achieved by multiplying QM by a suitable scalar factor. We deﬁne a renormalized function FM in all cases by setting FM(τ, z) = −cM QM(τ, z) , (9.52) where cM is the unique positive rational number such that FM has integer coeﬃcients with no common factor. Then (A) is always true and (B) and (C) will hold in the optimal cases. This normalization is also convenient for the presentation of the coeﬃcients in tables, since there are no denominators and very few minus signs. Tables of the ﬁrst few Fourier coeﬃcients of all FM up to M = 50 in the weight 2 case (i.e., for M with µ(M) = 1) and of all known FM having optimal growth in the weight 1 case (i.e., for M with µ(M) = −1) are given in A.1 and A.3 of the Appendix, respectively. Looking at these tables, we see that the values of M for which all three properties above hold are M = 6, 10, 14, 15, 21 and 26 in the case k = 2 and M = 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 30 and 42 in the case k = 2, and that in the k = 2 case we also get FM satisfying (C) but not (B) for M = 22 and FM satisfying (B) but not (C) for M = 35 and 39. This list is not changed if we look at a larger range of M (we have calculated up to M = 210 in the weight 2 case and M = 100 in the weight 1 case) or ∆(in each case we have calculated about twice as many Fourier coeﬃcients as those shown in the tables), so that it seems quite likely that it is complete.
For the weight 2 functions, the corollary of Theorem 9.41 tells us that C(FM; −1, 1) will always be negative with the normalization (9.52) and that we have cM = t · denom  ϕ(M) 24  , C(FM; −1, 1) = −t · numer  ϕ(M) 24  (9.53) for some positive rational number t. In all cases we have looked at, t turned out to be an integer, and in fact usually had the value 1. For instance, the second statement is true for all values of M tabulated in Appendix A, and also for M = 210, where Table 4 in §9.3 shows that cM = 1 and hence t = 1, but the table below giving all values up to M = 100 shows that it fails for M = 65 and M = 85.
M 6 10 14 15 21 22 26 33 34 35 38 39 46 cM 12 6 4 3 2 12 2 6 3 1 4 1 12 C(FM; −1, 1) 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 5 2 1 3 1 11 t 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 51 55 57 58 62 65 69 74 77 82 85 86 87 91 93 94 95 3 3 2 6 4 2 6 2 2 3 6 4 3 1 2 12 1 4 5 3 7 5 4 11 3 5 5 16 7 7 3 5 23 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 – 92 – If it is true that t is integral, then equation (9.53) shows that the above list of FM satisfying property (B) is complete, because we can then only have |C(FM; −1, 1)| = 1 if ϕ(M) divides 24, which in turn implies that M is at most 90 and hence within the range of our calculations.
We do not know whether the integrality is true in general, but in any case 12M+1t must be an integer, since correcting the initial choice Φstand 2,M = 12−M−1BM+1A−1 −A2,M by weak Jacobi forms cannot make its denominator any worse.
Exactly similar comments apply in the weight 1 case. Here a residue calculation similar to the ones described in the next section (but with the residue R as deﬁned in (10.17) below replaced by its weight 1 analogue as deﬁned in (10.59)) tells us that in the case of optimal growth eq. (9.43) still holds, so that we ﬁnd that eq. (9.53) still holds for some postive rational number t. If this t turns out to be an integer, it again follows that property (B) can only hold if ϕ(M)|24, and the list of all integers M with µ(M) = −1 satisfying this latter condition coincides exactly with the list (9.46). Thus, although we cannot yet prove that that list is complete, we can at least understand where it comes from.
4. Positivity of the Fourier coeﬃcients We now turn to properties (C) and (D). Here we can use the asymptotic formula given in Theorem 9.3 to understand the question of the signs and asymptotics of the Fourier coeﬃcients.
(We will discuss only the weight 2 case in detail, but a similar theorem and similar discussion could equally well be given for the case k = 1.) This theorem implies that (C) “almost holds” in the sense that for any ﬁxed value of r the Fourier coeﬃcients C(∆, r) eventually have a constant sign, so that there are at most ﬁnitely many exceptions to the statement. We therefore have to consider (D) and also the question of which values of r are most likely to give rise to the exceptional signs.
For the function QM (which we remind the reader diﬀers from FM by a negative pro-portionality factor, so that the expected behavior (D) would now say that C(∆, r) is always negative when r = rmin is the smallest positive square root of −∆), the value of the constant κr appearing in that theorem as given according to (9.39) and (9.43) by κ(QM, r) = −ϕ(M) 24 · 2 X 0<ℓ<M ℓ2 ≡1 (mod 4M) µ  ℓ+ 1 2 , M  cos πℓr M  .
(9.54) A similar formula applies in the weight 1 case with “cos” resplaced by “sin.” In the case when M is a prime, this immediately gives the positivity of κ(QM, rmin), and in the case when M has three prime factors, the tables in A.3 show that (D) usually fails. We therefore consider the weight 2 case, where µ(M) = +1.
If M (which we always assume to be larger than 1) is a product of two primes, and in particular for all M < 330 with µ(M) = 1 except 210, the sum on the right-hand side has only – 93 – two terms and reduces to simply cos(πr/M) −cos(πr∗/M), and since 0 < rmin < r∗ min < 2M and cos(πx) is decreasing on the interval [0, π], the value of −κ(QM, rmin) is indeed always strictly negative. It then follows from Theorem 9.3 that almost all C(FM; ∆, rmin) are positive, but there can be, and in general are, ﬁnitely many exceptions. However, for small M these are fairly rare, e.g., the following table lists all triples (M, r = rmin, n) within the range of Appendix A for which c(FM; n, r) is negative.
M 6–22 33 34 35 38 39 46 r — 8 15 2 17 10 21 n — 1, 5, 7 5, 11 1, 5 5, 7, 11 5 5, 7, 11, 13 (The corresponding r-values are marked with a star in the appendix, and a search up to a much larger n-limit yields no further negative coeﬃcients for these values of M.) Here again the asymptotic formula (9.38) helps us to understand this behavior: the negative values are much more likely to occur when κr is small. For instance, for M = 33 the table r ( = rmin ) 1 2 4 5 7 8 10 13 16 19 cos( πr 66) −cos( πr∗ 66 ) 1.58 1.31 1.71 0.94 1.71 0.49 1.58 1.31 0.94 0.49 shows that the residue classes rmin (mod 2M) most likely to give some negative Fourier coef-ﬁcients are 8 and 19, for which the values of κr (which are the same; this duplication always occurs for odd M) are minimal, and indeed the class r = 8 did lead to three negative coeﬃ-cients. The class r = 19 did not contain any negative values of c(n, r), but instead achieved its small initial average by the initial zeros forced by the optimal growth condition, which says that c(n, r) = 0 for 0 ≤n ≤(r2 −2)/4m.
For values of M for more than two prime factors on the other hand, it does not have to be true that κ(FM, rmin) > 0. It is true for the ﬁrst such index, M = 210, and even in a very strong form: not only is κr positive for each of the six possible values of rmin (which are nothing other than the values ℓ0 printed in boldface in Table 4), but of the seven “partners” of each rmin, i.e., the seven other values of r ∈[0, 210] with r2 ≡r2 min (mod 840), the three that have the same sign of C(∆, r) as for C(∆, rmin) (i.e., which diﬀer from rmin (mod 2p) for exactly two of the four prime divisors p of 210) all belong to the ﬁrst half of the interval [0, 210], while the four that have the opposite sign (i.e., which diﬀer from rmin (mod 2p) for one or three of these p) belong to the second half, so that all eight terms in the sum in (9.54) are positive. The value of κ(FM, rmin) is again positive for all rmin for the next two values M = 330 and M = 390, but for M = 462 = 2·3·7·11 and r (= rmin) = 31 we have κ(FM, r) < 0, so that in this case all but – 94 – ﬁnitely many coeﬃcients C(FM; ∆, r) will be negative rather than positive. What does hold for any M and any r (mod 2M) is that the values of C(FM; ∆, r) eventually all have the same sign, because the coeﬃcient κ(FM, r) in (9.38) can never vanish, since the primitive (2M)th roots of unity are linearly independent over Q.
9.6 Higher weights So far we have studied two families of meromorphic Jacobi forms ϕ1,m(τ, z) and ϕ2,m(τ, z) with particularly simple singularities, and the corresponding mock Jacobi forms. We now discuss in much less detail the analogous families for higher weights. We mention that other cases of the decomposition ϕ = ϕF + ϕP for meromorphic Jacobi forms with higher order poles27 [17, 98], and the asymptotics of their Fourier coeﬃcients [20], have been studied in the literature.
The starting point is a meromorphic Jacobi form ϕ(τ, z) = ϕk,m(τ, z) of weight k and arbitrary index m ∈N having as its unique singularity (modulo the period lattice Zτ + Z) a pole of order k at z = 0, which we normalized by requiring the leading term of ϕ to be (k −1)!/(2πiz)k. By subtracting a linear combination of functions ϕk′,m with k′ < k we can then ﬁx the entire principal part of ϕ at z = 0 to be ϕ(τ, z) = (k −1)!
(2πiz)k X 0≤2j<k m E2(τ) 12 j (2πiz)2j j!
+ O(1) as z →0.
We can make a standard choice, generalizing the previously deﬁned forms (9.2) and (9.1), by taking ϕ to be the unique polynomial in A−1 and B (resp. C times such a polynomial if k is odd) with modular coeﬃcients of the appropriate weight having this principal part, the next three of these being ϕstand 3,m = Bm C 12mA2 , ϕstand 4,m = 6 Bm+2 12m+2A2 , ϕstand 5,m = (B2 −mE4A2/2) Bm−1 C 12m A3 .
Any other allowed choice of ϕk,m will diﬀer from this standard one by a weak Jacobi form of weight k and index m, and any two choices will have the same polar part. To write it down, we introduce Euler’s functions Ek(y) = AvZ h(k −1)!
(2πiz)k i =  −y d dy k−1 AvZ h 1 2πiz i =  −y d dy k−1 1 2 y + 1 y −1  ∈Q h 1 y −1 i (which for k = 1 and k = 2 coincide with the functions R0 and R(2) 0 from §8) and their index m averages Ak,m(τ, z) = Av(m) Zτ+Z h(k −1)!
(2πiz)k i = Av(m) Ek(y)  = X s∈Z qms2y2msEk(qsy) 27These were considered in [17] while answering a question due to Kac concerning the modularity of certain characters of aﬃne Lie superalgebras.
– 95 – generalizing (9.3). These functions all have wall-crossing, with Fourier expansions given by Ek(y) = ( 1 2 δk,1 + P t>0 tk−1y−t if |y| > 1 −1 2 δk,1 −P t<0 tk−1y−t if |y| < 1 = X t∈Z sgn(t) −sgn(z2) 2 tk−1y−t and Ak,m(τ, z) = X s, t∈Z sgn(t) −sgn(s + z2/τ2) 2 tk−1qms2−sty2ms−t .
(9.55) (Note that in the latter expression the coeﬃcient of yr is a Laurent polynomial in q for every r and that the discriminant 4nm −r2 is the negative of a perfect square for each monomial qnyr occurring.) Then the polar part of ϕk,m is given by ϕP k,m(τ, z) = X 0≤2j<k (k −1)!
(k −1 −2j)! j!
m E2(τ) 12 j Ak−2j,m(τ, z) .
(To see this, observe that by (9.55) each of the functions Ak,m, and hence any linear combination of them with coeﬃcients depending only on τ, is in the kernel of the operator ϕ 7→hℓdeﬁned by (8.2) for all ℓ∈Z.) Its ﬁnite part Φk,m = ϕF k,m = ϕk,m −ϕP k,m is a weakly holomoprhic elliptic form that depends on the particular choice of ϕk,m. From the results of §10 (speciﬁcally, Theorem 10.1) it follows that for k ≥3 the function ϕk,m can always be chosen so that Φk,m is strongly holomorphic, this choice then obviously being unique up to the addition of a strongly holomorphic Jacobi form.
As an example, consider k = 3 and m = 2. (This is the smallest possibility since index 1 cannot occur in odd weight.) The ﬁnite part of our standard choice is Φstand 3,2 = B2C 144A2 −A3,2 −E2 3 A3,1 = hstand 3,2  ϑ2,1 −ϑ2,3  with hstand 3,2 = 1 144 q−1/8  1 + 51q + 2121q2 + 14422q3 + 60339q4 + 201996q5 + 588989q6 + · · ·  .
This is weakly holomorphic and has large Fourier coeﬃcients, but by subtracting a multiple of the unique weak Jacobi form E4C of this weight and index we get a new choice Φopt 3,2 = Φstand 3,2 −E4 144 C = hopt 3,2  ϑ2,1 −ϑ2,3  that is strongly holomorphic and has much smaller coeﬃcients hopt 3,2 = hstand 3,2 − E4 144 η3 = −4 3 q−1/8  q + 4q2 + 5q3 + 11q4 + 6q5 + 21q6 + · · ·  , – 96 – in accordance with the theorem just cited.
However, this choice, although optimal from the point of view of the order of growth of its Fourier coeﬃcients, is not the most enlightening one. By subtracting a diﬀerent multiple of E4C from Φstand 3,2 , we get a third function Φ3,2 = Φstand 3,2 + 7E4 144 C = Φopt 3,2 + E4 18 C = h3,2  ϑ2,1 −ϑ2,3  with h3,2 = hstand 3,2 + 7E4 144 η3 = hopt 3,2 + E4 18 η3 = 1 18 q−1/8 (1 + 219q + 2793q2 + 15262q3 + · · · ) .
This function can be identiﬁed: it is given by h3,2 = 1 3 ∂RS 1/2(h2) , where h2(τ) = q−1/8(−1 + 45q + 231q2 + · · · ) is the mock theta function deﬁned in (7.16) (the one occurring in the Mathieu moonshine story) and ∂RS 1/2 is the Ramanujan-Serre derivative as deﬁned in (3.7). We can also write this at the level of mock Jacobi forms as Φ3,2 = 1 24 L1,2  F2  , where F2 is the mock Jacobi form deﬁned in (7.32) and L1,2 the modiﬁed heat operator deﬁned in (4.12).
An analogous statement holds in general, e.g., for weight 3 we have Φ3,m = −L1,m  Φ1,m  (mod e J3,m) for any index m and any choice of the functions Φ3,m and Φ1,m in their deﬁning classes, and similarly for higher weight, the speciﬁc formulas for k ∈{3, 4} and the standard choices being Φstand 3,m + L1,m  Φstand 1,m  = −m −1 12m  4(m −2)E6A + (2m + 3)E4B  Bm−3C , Φstand 4,m + L2,m  Φstand 2,m  = −m + 1 72 · 12m  4mE6A + (2m −3)E4B  Bm−1 .
Thus in one sense, the higher-weight families are better than the weight 1 and weight 2 families (because they can be made strongly holomorphic by subtracting an appropriate weak Jacobi form), but in another, they are much less interesting (because they are always combinations of derivatives of lower-weight examples and ordinary Jacobi forms, so that they do not produce any essentially new functions).
– 97 – 10. Structure theorems for Jacobi and mock Jacobi forms In the last section we introduced two special families of meromorphic Jacobi forms and the associated mock Jacobi forms and described various observations concerning them.
In this section we try to give theoretical explanations for some of these. We begin by studying in §10.1 how the holomorphic Jacobi forms of weight k and index m lie in the space of weak Jacobi forms of the same weight and index, or equivalently, what the relations are among the polar Fourier coeﬃcients (i.e., the coeﬃcients of qnyr with 4nm < r2) of weak Jacobi forms. The results described here are relatively easy consequence of results in the literature but are, as far as we know, new. The remaining two subsections describe the application of these results to mock Jacobi forms in general and to our two special families in particular, providing fairly complete explanations of the experimentally found properties of the weight two family and partial explanations in the weight one case.
10.1 Relations among the polar coeﬃcients of weak Jacobi forms The deﬁnitions and main properties of holomorphic and weak Jacobi forms were reviewed in §4, following the more detailed treatment in [57]. Here we investigate the relationship of these two spaces in more detail.
By deﬁnition, a weak Jacobi form has coeﬃcients c(n, r) which are non-zero only for n ≥0, whereas a holomorphic one has coeﬃcients that vanish unless 4nm ≥r2. By virtue of the periodicity property (4.4), this stronger condition need only be checked for r running over a set of representatives for Z/2mZ, say −m < r ≤r, and since condition (4.1) with   a b c d  =   −1 0 0 −1  also implies that c(n, −r) = (−1)kc(n, r) and consequently C(∆, −r) = (−1)kC(∆, r), it in fact suﬃces to consider the coeﬃcients with 0 ≤r ≤m if k is even and those with 0 < r < m if k is odd. In other words, for all positive integers k and m we have an exact sequence 0 − →Jk,m − →e Jk,m P − →CN±,m ( (−1)k = ±1 ) , (10.1) where N+,m =  (r, n) ∈Z2 | 0 ≤r ≤m, 0 ≤n < r2/4m , N−,m =  (r, n) ∈Z2 | 0 < r < m, 0 ≤n < r2/4m , and where the map P (“polar coeﬃcients”) associates to ϕ ∈e Jk,m the collection of its Fourier coeﬃcients cϕ(n, r) for (n, r) ∈N±,m. In particular we have dim Jk,m ≥j(k, m) := dim e Jk,m − N±,m ( (−1)k = ±1 ) , (10.2) with equality if and only if the map P in (10.1) is surjective. (Cf. [57], p. 105.) – 98 – Using the description of e J∗,∗given in §4 (eqs. (4.25) and (4.35)) and the deﬁnition of N±,m, we can write this lower bound on the dimension explicitly as j(k, m) = (P 0≤j≤m  dim Mk+2j −⌈j2/4m⌉  if k is even, P 0<j<m  dim Mk+2j−1 −⌈j2/4m⌉  if k is odd, (10.3) where ⌈x⌉denotes the “ceiling” of a real number x ( = smallest integer ≥x). This formula is computable and elementary since dim Mk = k/12 + O(1) with the O(1) term depending only on k (mod 12), but is nevertheless not a good formula because the two terms P dim Mk+2j and P⌈j2/4m⌉are each equal to m2/12 + O(m), and j(k, m) is only of the order of m. In [57], pp. 122–125 it was shown that, somewhat surprisingly, the numbers j(k, m) can be given by a completely diﬀerent-looking formula involving class numbers of imaginary quadratic ﬁelds.
This formula has the form j(k, m) = 2k −3 24 (m + 1) + b 4 −1 4 X d|4m h(−d) + O(1) , (10.4) where m = ab2 with a square-free and where the O(1) term depends only on m and k modulo 12.
In particular, j(k, m) = 2k−3 24 m + O(m1/2+ε) as m →∞with k ﬁxed. The formula (10.4) has an interesting interpretation as the dimension of a certain space of classical modular forms of level m and weight 2k −2, discussed in detail on pp. 125–131 of [57].
In [57], it was shown that the inequality (10.2) is an equality for k ≥m and it was conjectured that this holds for all k ≥3. This was later proved in [115] as a consequence of a diﬃcult trace formula calculation. In fact, a slightly stronger statement was proved there: It is clear that the exact sequence (10.1) remains valid if one replaces Jk,m by J0 k,m and the map P : e Jk,m →CN±,m by the analogously deﬁned map P 0 : e Jk,m →CN 0 ±,m, where N 0 ±,m is deﬁned exactly like N±,m but with the strict inequality n < r2/4m replaced by n ≤r2/4m. Then the dimension formula proved in [115] says that dim J0 k,m = dim e Jk,m −|N 0 ±,m| and hence that the map P 0 is surjective, which is a stronger statement than the surjectivity of P since the set N 0 ±,m is larger than N±,m. In summary, the results of [57] and [115] together give the following complete description of the “polar coeﬃcients” maps for both holomorphic and cuspidal Jacobi forms when k ≥3: Theorem 10.1. For k > 2 and all m ≥1 the map P 0 : e Jk,m →CN 0 ±,m is surjective and we have a commutative diagram of short exact sequences 0 − →J0 k,m − →e Jk,m P 0 − →CN 0 ±,m − →0 ∩ || ↠ 0 − →Jk,m − →e Jk,m P − →CN±,m − →0 (10.5) – 99 – We now turn to the case k = 2, the one of main interest for us. Here formula (10.4) takes the explicit form j(2, m) = 1 2 jm + 1 3 k + jm + 1 3 k −m −b −1 4 −1 4 X d|4m h(−d) , (10.6) but for this value of k it was observed in [57] (p. 131) that equality could not always hold in (10.2) (indeed, the right-hand side is often negative) and that, for reasons explained in detail there, one should replace the number j(k, m) by the modiﬁed number j∗(2, m) := j(2, m) + δ(m) , where δ(m) := X d≤√m d|m, d2∤m 1 .
(10.7) We note that δ(m) is a linear combination of three multiplicative functions of m, namely δ(m) = 1 2σ0(m) + 1 2 δa,1 −σ0(b) (10.8) (with m = ab2, a square-free as before), or equivalently in terms of a generating Dirichlet series ∞ X m=1 δ(m) ms = 1 2 ζ(s)2 + 1 2 ζ(2s) −ζ(s)ζ(2s) .
(10.9) We also note that δ(m) depends only on the “shape” of m ( = the collection of exponents νi if m is written as Q pνi i ), the ﬁrst three cases being δ(pν) = 0 , (10.10) δ(pν1 1 pν2 2 ) = n1n2 , (10.11) δ(pν1 1 pν2 2 pν3 3 ) = 3n1n2n3 + ε1n2n3 + ε2n1n3 + ε3n1n2 , (10.12) in which we have written each νi as 2ni + εi −1 with ni ≥1 and εi ∈{0, 1}.
The conjecture made in [57] that dim Jk,m = j∗(2, m) for all m ≥1 was proved in [115], but here we want to give a sharper statement describing the cokernel of the map P explicitly.
To do this, we follow [57], pp. 132, where an elementary argument (containing a small error which will be corrected below) was given to show that dim J2,m ≥j∗(2, m) for square-free m.
Actually, it is more convenient to work with cusp forms, since the corresponding statement here is dim J0 2,m = dim e J2,m −|N 0 +,m| + δ0(m) (10.13) with δ0(m) = X d|m, d≤√m 1 = X m=m1·m2 up to order 1 , (10.14) – 100 – and δ0(m) is a slightly simpler function than δ(m). (The third term in (10.8) is missing.) We want to explain formula (10.13) by ﬁnding an explicit map β : CN 0 +,m = M 0≤r≤m 0≤n≤r2/4m C − →∆0(m) := M m=m1·m2 up to order C (10.15) such that the sequence 0 − →J0 2,m − →e J2,m P 0 − →CN 0 +,m β − →∆0(m) − →0 .
(10.16) is exact.
To give a natural deﬁnition of the map β, we work, not with e J2,m or even with J !
2,m, but with the larger vector spaces e E+,m and E !
+,m of even weak or weakly holomorphic elliptic forms of index m, as deﬁned at the end of §4.4. We deﬁne a “residue map” R : E !
+,m →C by ϕ = X n≥0, r∈Z c(n, r) qn yr 7→ R[ϕ] = Resτ=∞  ϕ(τ, 0) dτ  = X r∈Z c(0, r) .
(10.17) Then R[ϕ] = 0 if ϕ ∈J !
2,m because in that case ϕ( · , 0) belongs to M !
2 and the q0 term of any weakly holomorphic modular form f of weight two is zero by the residue theorem applied to the SL(2, Z)-invariant 1-form f(τ)dτ. (The map R was already used in [57], but it was erroneously stated there that for ϕ ∈e J2,m the function ϕ(τ, 0) itself, rather than just its residue at inﬁnity, vanishes.) Now for each decomposition m = m1 · m2 (up to order, i.e., without distinguishing the splittings m1 · m2 and m2 · m1) we deﬁne Rm1,m2 : E !
+,m →C by setting Rm1,m2(ϕ) = R  ϕ Wm1  if (m1, m2) = 1, where Wm1 is the involution deﬁned in §4.4, while if (m1, m2) = t > 1 then we deﬁne Rm1,m2(ϕ) as Rm1/t,m2/t(ϕ|ut), where ut is the map from E !
+,m to E !
+,m/t2 deﬁned in §4.4. (It was pointed out there that both Wm1 for (m1, m/m1) = 1 and ut for t2|m make sense on all of E !
+,m, and not just on the subspace of holomorphic Jacobi forms, but that this is not true for weak elliptic or weak Jacobi forms, which is why we are now working with weakly holomorphic forms.) We put all of these maps together to a single map R : E !
+,m →∆0(m) and then deﬁne the desired map β by the commutative diagram e E+,m P 0 − → CN 0 +,m ∩ ∩ E !
+,m − → CN !,0 +,m (10.18) R ↘ ↙β ∆0(m) with CN !,0 +,m deﬁned as in (10.23) below. (To see that such a map β exists, observe that the coeﬃcients c(0, r) occurring in (10.17) all have discriminant ∆= −r2 ≤0, that the operators – 101 – Wm1 and ut can be deﬁned purely in terms of the coeﬃcients Cϕ(∆, r) and preserve the condition ∆≤0, and ﬁnally that the coeﬃcients Cϕ(∆, r) for ϕ ∈e E+,m can all be expressed in terms of the coeﬃcients cϕ(n, r) with (n, r) ∈N+,m by virtue of the periodicity and evenness conditions deﬁning e E+,m.) The discussion above shows that the composition β ◦P 0 in (10.16) vanishes, since R vanishes on weakly holomorphic and hence in particular on weak Jacobi forms, and combining this statement with the dimension formula (10.13) proved in [115] we obtain the main result describing strong and weak Jacobi forms of weight 2 and arbitrary index: Theorem 10.2. The sequence (10.16) with β deﬁned by (10.18) is exact for all integers m ≥1.
The two theorems above give a complete description of the space of Jacobi forms of all weights k ≥2. We end this subsection by discussing the case of weight one. Here the description of Jacobi forms is very simple to state (though its proof is quite deep), since we have the following theorem of Skoruppa ([111], quoted as Theorem 5.7 of [57]): Theorem 10.3. We have J1,m = {0} for all m ≥1.
Combining this with the discussion above, we ﬁnd that in this case we have an exact sequence 0 − →e J1,m − → M 0<r<m 0≤n<r2/4m C − →C|j(1,m)| − →0 .
(10.19) with |j(1, m)| = −j(1, m) = m 24 + O  m1/2+ε .
We have not been able to ﬁnd a natural description of the last space, or explicit description of the last map, in (10.19), analogous to the results given for k = 2.
10.2 Choosing optimal versions of weak elliptic forms In this subsection, we will apply the theorem just explained to show how to make “optimal versions” of elliptic forms by counting actual Jacobi forms to get poles of small order.
Let e E+,m be as in the previous subsection and e E−,m be the similarly deﬁned space with c(n, −r) = −c(n, r), and let E±,m and E0 ±,m be the corresponding spaces with the condition (4.7) replaced by (4.5) and (4.6), respectively. The discussion of §10.1 can be summarized as saying that we have a commutative diagram of short exact sequences, 0 − →E±,m − →e E±,m P − →CN±,m − →0 ∪ ∪ || 0 − →Jk,m − →e Jk,m − →CN±,m − →0 (10.20) – 102 – for k > 2, (−1)k = ±1, and similarly with Jk,m and E±,m replaced by J0 k,m and E0 ±,m, N±,m by N 0 ±,m and P by P 0. For k = 2, we have instead: 0 − →E0 +,m − →e E+,m P 0 − →CN 0 +,m − →0 ∪ ∪ || 0 − →J0 2,m − →e J2,m − →CN 0 +,m β − →∆0(m) − →0 (10.21) in the cuspidal case, where ∆0(m) was deﬁned in (10.15) and β is deﬁned by β ◦P 0 = R. As a consequence of these diagrams and of the vanishing of δ(pν) (cf. equation (10.10)), which implies that the diagram (10.20) also holds for k = 2 when m is a prime power, we obtain: Theorem 10.4. Let k ≥2, and ϕ ∈e E±,m, where (−1)k = ±1. Then ϕ is the sum of an element of e Jk,m and an element of E0 ±,m if and only if either (i) k > 2 , or (ii) k = 2 and R(ϕ) (= β(P 0(ϕ))) = 0 ; If k = 2 and m is a prime power, then ϕ is the sum of an element of e Jk,m and an element of E±,m.
Theorem 10.4 for k = 2 makes a negative statement: if ϕ ∈e E+,m has R[ϕ] ̸= 0, and m is not a prime power, then ϕ cannot in general be decomposed as the sum of a weak Jacobi form of weight 2 and a holomorphic elliptic form. However, it turns out that we can come very close to this, writing ϕ as a sum of images under Hecke-like operators of forms that “have optimal growth” in the sense of §9.3. We now explain this in two steps. We ﬁrst use the decomposition (4.44), and its variants for weakly holomorphic Jacobi or elliptic forms, to reduce to the case of primitive forms. We then show that any primitive even elliptic form can be corrected by the addition of a weakly holomorphic weight 2 Jacobi form to give a new elliptic form whose non-zero Fourier coeﬃcients c(n, r) all have discriminant 4mn −r2 ≥−1.
Since the decomposition (4.44), as was already observed in §4.3 fails for weak Jacobi forms but holds for weakly holomorphic ones, we must ﬁrst extend the above results to weakly holo-morphic forms.
Proposition 10.1. All statements in Theorem 10.4 remain true mutatis mutandis if all e E, e J are replaced by E!, J!.
The proposition is equivalent to saying that the analog of (10.21) still holds with weakly holomorphic rather than weak forms, i.e. we have a diagram 0 − →E0 +,m − →E !
+,m P 0 − →CN 0,!
+,m − →0 ∪ ∪ || 0 − →J0 2,m − →J !
2,m − →CN 0,!
+,m β − →∆0(m) − →0 (10.22) – 103 – where N 0,!
+,m =  (r, n) ∈Z2 | 0 ≤r ≤m, −∞< n ≤r2/4m .
(10.23) We again prove this by comparing dimensions, even though the middle spaces in each row in the diagram (10.22) are inﬁnite-dimensional. Since any elliptic form ϕ has a minimal value of n with cϕ(n, r) ̸= 0 for some r, it suﬃces to prove the exactness of the rows in (10.22) with E !
+,m, J !
2,m, and CN 0,!
+,m replaced by the spaces E≥N +,m, J≥N 2,m, and CN 0,≥N +,m , of forms with non-zero coeﬃcients only for n ≥−N for some N ≥0. The only non-trivial part is the exactness at CN 0,≥−N +,m , and since the composition of the maps P 0 and β vanishes, we only need to check that the alternating sum of dimensions is zero. For this, we observe that the dimensions of J≥−N 2,m and CN 0,≥−N +,m are both larger by (m + 1)N than their values at N = 0: for CN 0,≥−N +,m , this is obvious since N 0,≥−N +,m diﬀers from N 0 +,m by the addition of N rows of length m + 1, and for J≥−N 2,m it follows from the computation dim J≥−N 2,m = dim e J12N+2,m  because J≥−N 2,m = ∆(τ)−N e J12N+2,m  = m X j=0 dim Mk+12N+2j = dim e J2,m + (m + 1)N .
(10.24) This completes the proof of the proposition.
□ Now we can apply the decomposition (4.44) to the whole diagram (10.22) to ﬁnd that everything can be reduced to primitive forms (and their images under the Ut operators). The key point is that although Ut and ut change the discriminant ∆= 4mn −r2 by multiplying or dividing it by t2, respectively, they do not change its sign, and therefore all of the spaces in our diagram can be decomposed as direct sums of primitive parts of lower index and their images under Ut. This reduces everything to case of primitive forms.
For primitive forms our diagram becomes 0 − →E0,prim +,m − →E!,prim +,m P 0 − →CN 0,!,prim +,m − →0 ∪ ∪ || 0 − →J0,prim 2,m − →J!,prim 2,m − →CN 0,!,prim +,m β − →∆0,prim(m) − →0 (10.25) where ∆0,prim(m) = M m=m1·m2 (m1,m2)=1 up to order C .
(10.26) The map β in (10.25) is again deﬁned by the requirement that β ◦P 0 = R on E!,prim +,m , and lands in ∆0,prim(m) because ϕ|ut = 0 for ϕ primitive and t > 1. The space ∆0,prim(m) has dimension δ0,prim(m) = 2s−1 if m > 1, where s is the number of primes dividing m. (The failure of this formula for m = 1 corresponds to the second term in (10.8).) – 104 – We also have the non-cusp-form analogs of the diagrams (10.22) and (10.25), where all superscripts “0” have been dropped and where N !
+,m is deﬁned as in (10.23) but with the condition 4mn −r2 ≤0 replaced by the strict inequality 4mn −r2 < 0, while ∆prim(m) is a space of dimension δprim(m) = δ0,prim(m) −1 = 2s−1 −1 (compare equation (10.8)). This space is the quotient of the space in (10.26) by the one-dimensional subspace of vectors with all components equal. This is essentially the idea of the proof of Theorem 9.4 given below.
Having completed these preparations, we now proceed to the proofs of our main results. We consider the case of square-free index ﬁrst and then give a brief description of the modiﬁcations needed to extend them to primitive forms of arbitrary index.
For m > 1 square-free, we will show that any ϕ ∈e E+,m can be corrected by a weak Jacobi form of weight 2 to get a another elliptic form whose non-zero Fourier coeﬃcients c(n, r) all have discriminant 4mn −r2 ≥−1, i.e., that we have a decomposition e E+,m = e J2,m + EOG +,m (m square-free), (10.27) with EOG +,m deﬁned as in §9.3. Actually, this is still not quite the statement we want, since it is slightly wasteful: the codimension of E0 +,m in EOG +,m is 2s−1+1, where s as before is the number of prime factors of m (there are 2s−1 pairs (r, n) ∈N 0 +,m with ∆:= 4nm−r2 equal to −1, and one pair (0,0) with ∆= 0), and there are only dim ∆0(m) = 2s−1 constraints Rm1,m2(ϕ) = 0 coming from diagram (10.21). Correspondingly, the intersection of the two spaces on the right-hand side of (10.27) contains J2,m (= J0 2,m in this case) as a subspace of codimension 1. To get a sharp statement, we should therefore replace EOG +,m by a suitable codimension one subspace. There are three natural ways to do this, each of which leads to a sharpening of (10.27), corresponding exactly (in the square-free case) to the various choices of Φ0 2,m introduced in the discussion preceding Theorem 9.5. What’s more, all statements remain true verbatim for arbitrary m > 1 if we restrict to primitive forms. We state all three variants in a single theorem.
Theorem 10.5. Suppose that m > 1 is square-free and let EOG,⋆ m (⋆= I, II, III) denote the codimension one subspace of EOG +,m deﬁned by one of the three conditions (I) P 0<r<m, r2≡1 (mod 4m) Cϕ(−1; r) = 0, (II) cϕ(0, 1) = 0, (III) cϕ(0, 0) = 0, respectively. Then we have an exact sequence 0 − →J2,m diag − →e J2,m ⊕EOG,⋆ m − − →e E+,m − →0 , (10.28) i.e., any even weak elliptic form of index m can be decomposed as the sum of a weak Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m and an element of EOG,⋆ m , and this decomposition is unique up to a holomorphic Jacobi form (which can be added to one term and subtracted from the other).
– 105 – For m > 1 the same statement remains true if we replace e E+,m by its subspace e Eres−prim +,m of forms ϕ satisfying R(ϕ|ut) = 0 for all t > 1 and EOG,⋆ m by its intersection with e Eres−prim +,m .
Proof. By the exactness of the top line of diagram (10.21), we can ﬁnd functions ψm;(r,n) ∈ e E+,m, unique up to the addition of cusp forms, mapping to the canonical basis δ(r,n) of CN 0 +,m.
Clearly, the space EOG,III +,m /E0 +,m is spanned by ψm;(r,n) with 0 < r < m and 4mn −r2 = −1, and has dimension 2s−1. (There are exactly two square roots of 1 modulo 2P for each exact prime power divisor P of m and these can be combined arbitrarily by the Chinese remainder theorem. This gives 2s residue classes r (mod 2m) with r2 ≡1 (mod 4m), and if we choose the representatives of smallest absolute values then half of them are positive.) Moreover, the basis elements can be chosen to be a single orbit of the group {Wm1}m1|m introduced in §4.4, whose cardinality is the same number 2s−1. Namely, if Am is any choice of ψm;(1,0), i.e. any function in e E+,m whose unique non-zero coeﬃcient in N 0 +.m is c(0, 1) = 1, then the other functions ψm;(r,n) with (r, n) ∈N 0 +,m and 4mn−r2 = −1, can be chosen to be the images of Am under the Atkin-Lehner involutions Wm1, m = m1m2. More explicitly, with this choice ψm;(r,n) equals Am|Wm1 with m1 = gcd   r+1 2 , m  , m2 = gcd   r−1 2 , m  , and conversely Am|Wm1 for any decomposition m = m1m2 equals ψm;(|r0|,(r2 0−1)/4m) where r0 (= 1∗in the notation of §4.4) is the unique r0 satisfying r0 ≡−1 (mod 2m1) , r0 ≡1 (mod 2m2) , |r0| < m .
(10.29) On the other hand, for any ϕ ∈EOG,III +,m , we have R1,m(ϕ) = R[ϕ] = 2cϕ(0, 1) (10.30) (because cϕ(0, −1) = cϕ(0, 1) and cϕ(0, r) = 0 for all r ̸= ±1 by the deﬁning property of EOG,III +,m ), and more generally, Rm1,m2(ϕ) = 2 cϕ(r0, (r2 0 −1)/4m) (10.31) for each decomposition m = m1m2, and with r0 as in (10.29). It follows that, for any two decompositions m = m1m2 and m = m′ 1m′ 2, we have Rm1,m2  Am |Wm′ 1  = ( 2 if m′ 1 = m1 or m′ 1 = m2 , 0 otherwise .
(10.32) This shows that the map EOG,III +,m /E0 +,m R − → M m=m1·m2 up to order C (10.33) is an isomorphism, and in combination with Theorem 10.4, completes the proof of the theorem in the case of square-free m and ⋆= III: any ϕ ∈e E+,m can be decomposed, uniquely up – 106 – to Jacobi cusp forms, as the sum of 1 2 P m=m1m2 Rm1,m2(ϕ)Am|Wm1 ∈EOG,III +,m and an element of e J2,m.
The proofs for ⋆= I and ⋆= II are almost identical, changing the basis {ψm;(r,n) = Am|Wm1} of EOG,III +,m /E0 +,m in both cases in such a way as to satisfy the new deﬁning condition without changing the residues, i.e., in the case ⋆= II by replacing the ﬁrst basis element ψm;(1,0) by 2ψm;(0,0), and in the case ⋆= I by adding 2ψm;(0,0) −2−s+1 P r′ ψm;(r′,n) to each basis element.
The proof of the statement for forms of arbitrary index m is very similar, since there are still 2s−1 polar coeﬃcients of a form in EOG +,m, in one-to-one correspondence with the decompo-sitions of m into two coprime factors. The details are left to the reader.
Theorem 10.5 says that the ﬁrst line in the diagram 0 − → Jprim 2,m diag − →e Jprim 2,m ⊕EOG,prim,⋆ m − − →e Eprim +,m − →0 ∩ ∩ || (10.34) 0 − →JOG,prim 2,m diag − → e Jprim 2,m ⊕EOG,prim m − − →e Eprim +,m − →0 is exact. The exactness of the second line is a trivial consequence, and the fact that EOG,prim,⋆ +,m has codimension exactly one in EOG,prim +,m implies that Jprim 2,m has codimension one in JOG,prim 2,m .
Moreover, the proof of the theorem also shows that JOG,⋆ 2,m = J2,m.
(If ϕ ∈JOG 2,m, then the vanishing of the residues Rm1m2(ϕ) for all decompositions with (m1, m2) = 1 implies that the polar coeﬃcients Cϕ(−1, r) are all equal to one another and to −1 2cϕ(0, 0), so that imposing any of the conditions (I), (II), (III) forces ϕ to be holomorphic. Conversely, if ϕ ∈J2,m, then the conditions OG, (I), (II) are trivial, and (III) holds because R[ϕ] = 0.) It follows that the codimension of J2,m in JOG 2,m is also one.
10.3 The residues of mock Jacobi forms We can apply the general theorems of the previous subsection to mock Jacobi forms. In par-ticular, if we have any weak mock Jacobi form of weight k ≥3 and index m, it will be in e E±,m, and can be corrected by a weak Jacobi form to get a holomorphic mock Jacobi form. In the case k = 2, there is an obstruction R(ϕ) to this being true, but, by the way we deﬁned it, this obstruction can only depend on the shadow of ϕ. In this subsection, we show how to compute R(ϕ) explicitly in terms of the shadow. Since R(ϕ) is the vector with components R  ϕ|u(m1,m2)|Wm1/(m1,m2)  , it suﬃces to compute R[ϕ] for a weak mock Jacobi form of weight 2 in terms of the shadow of ϕ.
Let ϕ(τ, z) be a (strong or weak) mock Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m. Then, by deﬁnition, ϕ has a theta expansion (4.10) where each hℓis a (in general weakly holomorphic) mock modular form of weight 3/2 and has a completion b hℓ= hℓ+ g∗ ℓfor some modular form gℓof weight 1/2 such that the completion b ϕ = P ℓb hℓϑm,ℓ= ϕ + P ℓg∗ ℓϑm,ℓtransforms like a Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m.
– 107 – As usual, we denote by ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) the Thetanullwert ϑm,ℓ(τ, 0).
Theorem 10.6. Let ϕ be as above. Then R[ϕ] = √π 6 X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m, ℓ, gℓ  , (10.35) where ( · , · ) denotes the Petersson scalar product in weight 1/2.
Proof. With the normalization of the Petersson scalar product as given in (3.14), we have X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m,ℓ, gℓ  = 3 π Z F F(τ) dµ(τ) , (10.36) where F(τ) = τ 1/2 2 X ℓ(mod 2m) gℓ(τ) ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) , (10.37) and F denotes a fundamental domain for Γ ≡SL2(Z). This makes sense since the function F(τ) is Γ-invariant (the individual terms in (10.37) are not, which is why we had to be a little careful in the normalization of the scalar product) and is convergent because the weight of the modular forms gℓand ϑ0 m,ℓis less than 1. From eq. (7.1) it follows that the τ-derivative of the completion b ϕ(τ, 0) = ϕ(τ, 0) + X ℓ(mod 2m) g∗ ℓ(τ) ϑ0 m,ℓ(τ) , (10.38) of ϕ(τ, 0) satisﬁes ∂ ∂τ b ϕ(τ, 0) = 1 4i√π F(τ) τ 2 2 .
(10.39) The fact that b ϕ(τ, 0) transforms like a modular form of weight 2 on Γ implies that the diﬀerential one-form ω = b ϕ(τ, 0) dτ is Γ invariant, and equation (10.39) implies dω = d  b ϕ(τ, 0) dτ  = −∂b ϕ(τ, 0) ∂τ dτ dτ = 1 2√π F(τ) dµ(τ) .
(10.40) Therefore, by Stokes’s theorem, we have √π 6 X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m,ℓ, gℓ  = Z F dω = Z ∂F ω = lim T→∞ Z ∂F(T) ω (10.41) where F(T) is the truncated fundamental domain {τ ∈H | |τ| > 1 , |τ1| < 1 2 , τ2 < T} .
(10.42) – 108 – On the other hand, we have Z ∂F(T) ω = Z 1 2 +iT −1 2 +iT ω = Z 1 2 +iT −1 2 +iT ϕ(τ, 0) dτ + O   1 √ T  .
(10.43) The ﬁrst equality holds because ω is Γ-invariant, and all the edges of F(T) except the top edge τ2 = T come in pairs which are Γ-equivalent, but of opposite orientation. The second equality follows from (10.38), and because ϑ0 m,ℓis O(1) and g∗ ℓ(τ) is O(T −1/2) by (7.2) with k = 3/2.
The theorem then follows.
The theorem immediately implies a more general formula for the residue Rm1,m2(ϕ) = R  ϕ Wm1  when m = m1m2 with (m1, m2) = 1 in terms of Petersson scalar products, namely, Rm1,m2(ϕ) = √π 6 X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m, ℓ, gℓ∗ , (10.44) where ℓ7→ℓ∗is the involution on (Z/2mZ)∗appearing in the deﬁnition of Wm1.
10.4 Remaining proofs of theorems from §9 In this subsection, we apply the results proved so far to the special family studied in §9, namely, the meromorphic Jacobi forms ϕ2,m having a pole 1/(2πiz)2 at the origin and their associated mock Jacobi forms Φ2,m. Speciﬁcally, we shall prove Theorems 9.1, 9.2, 9.4, 9.5, and 9.7.
We begin with a preliminary remark.
Two of the results we need to prove are Theo-rem 9.1 and the statement that the functions Φ0 2,m deﬁned implicitly by (9.37) are primitive modulo weak Jacobi forms.
Both of these have the form that a certain elliptic form is in fact a (weak) Jacobi form, i.e., that its shadow vanishes.
Since the forms in question are deﬁned using the Hecke-like operators deﬁned in §4.4, we ﬁrst have to explain how the ac-tion of these operators extends to non-holomorphic elliptic forms, since then we can apply them to the completions of our mock Jacobi forms and verify the necessary identities between shadows. The deﬁnitions of the Hecke-like operators were given in terms of the Fourier coef-ﬁcients c(n, r) or C(∆, ℓ) deﬁned by (4.3) and (4.4). In the case of the completions of mock modular forms Φ, when we apply equation (4.36) or (4.37) for the action of Ut or Vt with the ϕ there replaced by ΦC := b Φ −Φ (the “correction term” discussed at the end of §8.3), we must interpret c(n, r) as the coeﬃcient of β(|n|τ2) qn yr rather than simply qnyr as in the holomorphic case, where β(t) = p π/4m erfc(2 √ πt) in the weight 2 case, and similarly for equation (4.43) and C(∆, r (mod 2m)). In view of (9.5) and (7.2), these coeﬃcients in the case of Φ2,m are given by C(ΦC 2,m; ∆, ℓ(mod 2m)) = X λ2=−∆ λ≡ℓ(mod 2m) |λ| .
(10.45) – 109 – Proof of Theorem 9.1: We have to show that for m = P1 · · · Pr (Pi = pνi i , pi distinct primes) we have Φ2,m r Y i=1 (1 + εiWPi) ≡  Φ2,M Y p|M (1 −Wp)  V (M) 2,m/M , (10.46) where M is the product of the primes pi for which εi = −1 and “ ≡” means that the two sides of the equation diﬀer by a weak Jacobi form. Because of the multiplicativity of the Hecke-like operators Ud, Vt and Wm1, this formula can be rewritten as Φ2,m r Y i=1 (1 + εiWPi) ≡Φ2,M Y εi=−1 (1 −Wpi)V(pi) Pi/pi Y εi=+1 V(1) Pi , (10.47) so by induction on r, it suﬃces to show that if P = pν||m then Φ2,m |(1 + WP) ≡Φ2,m/P |V(1) 2,P , Φ2,m |(1 −WP) ≡Φ2,mp/P |(1 −Wp) V(p) 2,P/p .
(10.48) For this, it is enough to show that in each the diﬀerence of the left-hand side and the right-hand side has shadow zero.
For the ﬁrst equation in (10.48), eq. (10.45) implies that the “correction term” for the left-hand side is given by C(ΦC 2,m|(1 + WP) ; ∆, ℓ(mod 2m)) = C(ΦC 2,m ; ∆, ℓ(mod 2m)) + C(ΦC 2,m ; ∆, ℓ∗(mod 2m)) = ( D(δ(2m) D,ℓ+ δ(2m) D,−ℓ+ δ(2m) D,ℓ∗+ δ(2m) D,−ℓ∗) if ∆= −D2, for some D ∈N 0 if −∆is not a perfect square (10.49) where ℓ∗(mod 2m) is deﬁned by ℓ∗≡−ℓ(mod 2P), ℓ∗≡+ℓ(mod 2m/P), and the notation δ(n) a,b means δa,b (mod n). The correction term for the right-hand side, on the other hand, is given (since V(1) 2,P = V2,P −pV2,P/p2Up, where the second term is omitted if p2 ∤P) by X d|( ∆+ℓ2 4m ,ℓ,P) d C  ΦC 2, m P ; ∆ d2, ℓ d (mod 2m P )  −p X d|( ∆+ℓ2 4m ,ℓ, P p2 ) d C  ΦC 2, m P ; ∆ p2d2, ℓ pd (mod 2m P )  = X d|( ∆+ℓ2 4m ,ℓ,P) X λ2=−∆ λ≡ℓ(mod 2md P ) |λ| − X d|( ∆+ℓ2 4m ,ℓ, P p2 ) X λ2=−∆ λ≡ℓ(mod 2md P ) |λ| , = X d∈{P,P/p} d|( ∆+ℓ2 4m ,ℓ,P ) X λ2=−∆ λ≡ℓ(mod 2md P ) |λ| , (10.50) where the last line holds because the terms in the ﬁrst sum in the second line with d|Pp−2 cancel with the terms in the second sum. The terms with d = P in the third line give the ﬁrst – 110 – two terms √ −D = ±ℓ∗of the right hand side of (10.49), while the terms with d = P in the third line give the second two terms √ −D = ±ℓ∗.
The correction term for the left-hand side of the second equation in (10.48) is given by the the right-hand side of (10.49) with the signs of the last two terms changed. This is now equal to zero unless (ℓ, m) = 1, in which case it is equal to √ −∆(resp. − √ −∆) if D ≡±ℓ(mod 2m) (resp. D ≡±ℓ∗(mod 2m)). The correction term for the right-hand side, on the other hand, is given by X d|(ℓ, P p , ∆+ℓ2 4m ) d  C  ΦC 2,mp/P ; ∆ d2 , ℓ d (mod 2mp P )  −C  ΦC 2,mp/P ; ∆ d2 , ℓ∗ d (mod 2mp P )  = X d|(ℓ, P p , ∆+ℓ2 4m )  X λ2=−∆ λ d ≡ℓ d (mod 2mp P ) − X λ2=−∆ λ d ≡ℓ∗ d (mod 2mp P )  |λ| , (10.51) where ℓ∗(mod 2mp/P) is now deﬁned by ℓ∗≡−ℓ(mod 2p), ℓ∗≡+ℓ(mod 2m/P). If p|ℓ, then ℓ∗= ℓand the expression vanishes, so that only d = 1 contributes in the ﬁrst summation.
The condition 4m|(∆+ ℓ2) combined with λ ≡ℓ(mod 2mp/P) implies λ ≡ℓ(mod 2m) (and similarly for ℓ∗since ℓ2 ≡ℓ∗2 (mod 2mp/P)), thus proving the second equation in (10.48).
□ Proof of Theorem 9.2: By M¨ obius inversion, the mock Jacobi forms Φ2,m associated to any choice of minimal meromorphic Jacobi forms ϕ2,m can be represented in the form (9.37), where Φ0 2,m is deﬁned by Φ0 2,m = X d2|m µ(d) Φ2,m/d2 | Ud .
(10.52) We have to show that Φ0 2,m can be chosen to be primitive and to have optimal growth.
To prove the second of these statements, it is enough to show that Φ0 2,m|up has no shadow for all primes p with p2|m. Then, by Theorem 10.5, the weak elliptic form Φ0 2,m can be chosen (by adding a weak Jacobi form) to have optimal growth. Writing the square divisors of m as d2p2i with p ∤d and noting that µ(dpi) = 0 for i > 1 and that Udp = UdUp, Udup = upUd, and Upup = p, we ﬁnd from (10.52) that Φ0 2,m |up = X d2|m, p∤d µ(d)  Φ2,m/d2 |Ud −Φ2,m/d2p2 |Ud |Up  | up = X d2|m, p∤d µ(d)  Φ2,m/d2 |up −p Φ2,m/d2p2 | Ud , so it suﬃces to show that Φ2,m|up and p Φ2,m/p2 have the same shadow for any m with p2|m.
But the shadow of Φ2,m = ϕF 2,m is determined by ϕC 2,m = b Φ2,m −Φ2,m (cf. comments at the end – 111 – of §8.3), and by (10.45), we have: C(ϕC 2,m ; ∆p2, rp (mod 2m)) = ( p|λ| if ∆= −λ2, λ ≡r (mod 2m/p) , 0 otherwise .
(10.53) Then, from (4.43), we have: C(ϕC 2,m|up ; ∆, ℓ(mod 2m/p2)) = X r (mod 2m/p) r≡ℓ(mod 2m/p2) C(ϕC 2,m ; ∆p2, rp (mod 2m)) , = ( p|λ| if ∆= −λ2, λ ≡ℓ(mod 2m/p2) , 0 otherwise .
= p C(ϕC 2,m/p2 ; ∆, ℓ) .
(10.54) This completes the proof of the fact that Φ0 2,m can be chosen to have optimal growth. Now, by formula (4.43), we have that Φ0 2,m|ut, and hence also Φ0 2,m|ut|Ut, is holomorphic for t > 1, so by replacing Φ0 2,m by πprim(Φ0 2,m) as deﬁned in (4.46) we can also assume that Φ0 2,m is primitive. □ Proof of Theorem 9.4: The proof of Theorem 10.5 given in §10.2 the following discussion already showed that JOG 2,m/J2,m is one-dimensional and that any representative Km of this quo-tient space, if we normalize it to have c(Km ; 0, 0) = 2, has polar coeﬃcients as given in the statement of Theorem 9.4. Since all the polar coeﬃcients C(Km ; −1, r) are equal, we have that Km|Wm1 −Km ∈J2,m for all m1||m, so (by averaging) we can choose Km to be invariant under all Atkin-Lehner operators. Finally, we can make Km primitive by the argument used at the end of the proof of Theorem 9.2.
□ Remark. For square-free m, since all holomorphic Jacobi forms are in fact cusp forms, Km is unique up to Jacobi cusp forms, and its coeﬃcients with ∆= 0 are unique. In this case the only such coeﬃcient, up to translation, is c(0, 0). If m is not square-free, there is more than one coeﬃcient c(n, r) such that ∆= 0. Notice that r2 ≡0 (mod 4m) ⇔(r, 2m) = 2m/t with t2|m.
For each t with t2|m, we have X j (mod t) C(Km ; 0, 2mj t (mod 2m)) = ( −2 if t = 1 , 0 if t > 1 .
(10.55) (For t = 1, the sum on the left reduces to the single term c(Km ; 0, 0) = −2, and for t > 1, it equals C(Km|ut; 0, 0), which vanishes because Km|ut ∈J2,m/t2.) We can choose the ∆= 0 coef-ﬁcients arbitrarily subject to this one constraint, and once we have made a choice, then Km is unique up to cusp forms even in the non-square-free case. For instance, at the expense of intro-ducing denominators, we could ﬁx Km uniquely up to cusp forms by requiring that C(Km; 0, r) – 112 – depends only on the gcd of r and 2m. (This would correspond to choosing a = 1 2 in the ﬁrst and third tables at the end of §9.3.) Another choice, more similar to our “⋆= II” condition, would be to choose C(Km; 0, r) = 0 for all r with 4m|r2 and r ∤2m, in which case the remaining coeﬃcients C(Km; 0, 2m/t) (t2|m) are uniquely determined by (10.55). (This would correspond to choosing a = 1 in the ﬁrst of the tables at the end of §9.3.) The reader can easily work out the complete formula for all of the coeﬃcients C(Km; 0, r) for either of these two special choices.
Our next task is to prove Theorem 9.5. For this we need to calculate the residues of Φ2,m, using the results of the previous subsection. We therefore have to apply the formula (10.44) to the mock modular form Φ2,m = ϕF 2,m. (Note that the residue of this form will be independent of the speciﬁc choice of ϕ2,m, since any two choices diﬀer by a Jacobi form and the residues of Jacobi forms vanish.) Since the completion of Φ2,m involves the weight 1/2 unary theta series ϑ0 m,ℓ, the ﬁrst step is to compute the scalar products of these theta series.
Proposition 10.2. For m ∈N, and ℓ1, ℓ2 ∈Z/2mZ, we have (ϑ0 m, ℓ1 , ϑ0 m, ℓ2) = 1 2√m  δℓ1,ℓ2 (mod 2m) + δℓ1,−ℓ2 (mod 2m)  (10.56) Proof. Formula (3.15) gives (ϑ0 m, ℓ1 , ϑ0 m, ℓ2) = 1 2 Ress= 1 2 X r>0 (δr, ℓ1 (2m) + δr, −ℓ1 (2m))(δr, ℓ2 (2m) + δr, −ℓ2 (2m)) (r2/4m)s  .
The propostition follows.
Proposition 10.3. Let ϕ2,m be any meromorphic Jacobi form of weight 2 and index m with pole 1/(2πiz)2 and its translates, and let Φ2,m be its ﬁnite part ϕF 2,m. Then Rm1,m2(Φ2,m) = m1 + m2 12 .
(10.57) Proof. By equation (9.5), the ℓth component gℓof the shadow for Φ2,m is −p m 4πϑ0 m,ℓ. When (m1, m2) = 1, Rm1,m2(Φ2,m) = R[Φ2,m |Wm1]. Theorem 10.6 then gives: R[Φ2,m |Wm1] = √m √ 4π √π 6 X ℓ(mod 2m)  ϑ0 m,ℓ, ϑ0 m,ℓ∗  = 1 24 X ℓ(mod 2m)  δℓ,ℓ∗(mod 2m) + δℓ,−ℓ∗(mod 2m)  = 1 12 (m1 + m2) .
– 113 – In this calculation, we used Proposition 10.2 to get the second line. For the third line, recall that ℓ∗is deﬁned by (ℓ∗≡−ℓ(mod 2m1), ℓ∗≡ℓ(mod 2m2)), so that ℓ∗≡ℓ(mod 2m) ⇔m1 |ℓ (which is true for 2m2 values of ℓin Z/2mZ), and similarly, ℓ∗≡−ℓ(mod 2m) ⇔m2 |ℓ(which is true for 2m1 values of ℓ). When (m1, m2) = t > 1, we have Rm1,m2(Φ2,m) = Rm1/t,m2/t(Φ2,m |ut).
As we have shown in the proof of Theorem 9.2, the shadow of Φ2,m |ut is the same as the shadow of tΦ2,m/t2, so Rm1/t,m2/t(Φ2,m | ut) = tRm1/t,m2/t(Φ2,m/t2) = t( m1 t + m2 t )/12 = (m1 + m2)/12 by the special case already proved.
The reader might ﬁnd it helpful to compare the statement of this proposition with the table in §9.2 presenting the data for the case m = 6, in which the function Φ = Φ2,6 (in any of its three versions I, II, or III) has R1,6(Φ) = 2C(Φ; −1, ±1(mod 12)) + C(Φ; 0, 0(mod 12)) = 7/12 , R2,3(Φ) = 2C(Φ; −1, ±5(mod 12)) + C(Φ; 0, 0(mod 12)) = 5/12 .
Proof of Theorem 9.5: We can now complete the proof of Theorem 9.5 and its corollary. For m square-free, any choice of Φ = Φ0 2,m in EOG m , and any r with r2 ≡1 (mod 4m), we have 2C(Φ; −1, ℓ) + C(Φ; 0, 0) = R[Φ|Wm1] = m1 + m2 12 (10.58) by Proposition 10.3, where m = m1m2 is the decomposition of m for which r∗= 1. Since C(ΦIII; 0, 0) = 0, this proves Theorem 9.5 and also gives the corresponding formulas C(ΦI; −1, r) = −(m1 −1)(m2 −1) 12 , C(ΦII; −1, r) = −1 12 m1 + m2 2 − Y p|m p + 1 2  for ΦI and ΦII, as well as formula (9.43) for the polar coeﬃcients of QM when µ(M) = 1.
If m is not square-free, then the solutions r (mod 2m) of r2 ≡1 (mod 4m) are still in 1:1 correspondence with the decompositions of m into coprime factors m1 and m2. To compute the corresponding Fourier coeﬃcient of Φ0 2,m, we look at each term in (10.52) separately, writing each d as d1d2 with d2 i |mi and noting that m1 d2 1 = ( r−1 2 , m d2), m2 d2 2 = ( r+1 2 , m d2), after which (9.41) follows from (10.57) and the fact that R[ϕ|Ud] = R[ϕ].
□ Proof of Theorem 9.7: It is enough to show that any weak Jacobi form of optimal growth is actually holomorphic since, as we have seen in Theorem 10.3, there are no holomorphic Jacobi forms of weight 1. To show this, we use the “residue operator on weight 1 forms” deﬁned by R(1)[ϕ] = Resτ=∞  ϕ′(τ, 0) dτ  = X r∈Z r cϕ(0, r) (10.59) instead of (10.17), where, as usual, ϕ′(t, z) = 1 2πi d dz ϕ(t, z). This residue vanishes if ϕ ∈e J1,m, since then ϕ′(·, 0) ∈M !
2. If, further, ϕ has optimal growth, then 2cϕ(0, 1) = R(1)[ϕ] = 0, – 114 – so Cϕ(−1, 1) vanishes. By the same argument with ϕ replaced by ϕ acted upon by each of the Atkin-Lehner operators, one has that Cϕ(−1, r) = 0 for all r with r2 ≡−1 (mod 4m), and thus ϕ ∈J1,m.
□ 11. Quantum black holes and mock modular forms We now have all the ingredients required to address the questions posed in the introduction.
These answers follow from applying our results of §8, in particular theorem 8.3, to the quarter-BPS partition function of the the N = 4 theory. It turns out that in this case, many of the mathematical objects in the theorem simplify. A reader who has not gone through the details of §8 could still fruitfully read this section to obtain the relevant results for this example.
In particular, we show in §11.1 that the immortal black hole degeneracies extracted from the asymptotic partition function (6.14) are Fourier coeﬃcients of a (mixed) mock Jacobi form.
The completion transforms as a true Jacobi form and obeys a ﬁrst order partial diﬀerential equation (11.23) which can be understood as a holomorphic anomaly equation. In §11.2 we discuss the physical origin of the meromorphy of the asymptotic counting function in this example and how it is related to the noncompactness of the microscopic brane dynamics. In §11.3 we analyze the contour corresponding to the M-theory limit to embed our analysis in the context of AdS3/CFT2 holography near the horizon of a black string. We conclude in §11.4 with comments and open problems.
11.1 Mock Jacobi forms, immortal black holes, and AdS2 holography We ﬁrst discuss the consequences of the S-duality symmetry and its relation to the spectral ﬂow symmetry for the moduli-independent immortal degeneracies d∗(n, ℓ, m) deﬁned by (6.14).
Recall that under the S-duality transformations 1 b 0 1  (11.1) with integer b, the S-modulus (2.21) transforms as: S →S + b .
(11.2) which means that the axion transforms as a →a+b. Since the axion arises from a dimensional reduction of the 3-form ﬁeld in the M-theory frame (discussed in §11.3), this subgroup (11.1) of S-duality has its origins in large gauge transformations of the 3-form ﬁeld. When the axion transforms as above, the eﬀective theta angle changes and as a result the charge vector of the dyon transforms as (Q, P) →(Q + Pb, P) due to the Witten eﬀect [122]. Consequently, the charge-invariants transform as n →n + mb2 + bℓ, ℓ→ℓ+ 2mb , m →m.
(11.3) – 115 – which are nothing but the spectral ﬂow transformations. Note that m is left ﬁxed by this subgroup of S-duality whereas other elements of the S-duality group would change m. Thus, only this subgroup is expected to act on the sector with a ﬁxed m. The covariance of the spectrum under these S-duality transformations implies d(n, ℓ, m)|S,µ = d(n + mb2 + b, ℓ+ 2mb, m)|S+b,µ .
(11.4) Since the degeneracies of immortal black holes are independent of the moduli by deﬁnition, they are actually invariant under S-duality: d∗(n + mb2 + b, ℓ+ 2mb, m) = d∗(n, ℓ, m) .
(11.5) From the mathematical point of view, this is precisely the action of the elliptic part of the Jacobi transformations (4.2) on the Fourier coeﬃcients of a Jacobi (or mock Jacobi) form.
The immortal degeneracies d∗(n, ℓ, m) are computed using the attractor contour (6.13), for which the imaginary parts of the potentials are proportional to the charges and scale as Im(σ) = 2n/ε , Im(τ) = 2m/ε , Im(z) = −ℓ/ε , (11.6) with ε very small and positive. In other words, |p| = λ2n , |q| = λ2m , |y| = λ−ℓ, with λ = exp(−2π/ϵ) →0 (11.7) on the attractor contour. We assume that n > m without loss of generality, otherwise one can simply exchange σ and τ. Moreover, using the spectral ﬂow symmetry (11.5) we can always bring ℓto the window 0 ≤ℓ< 2m for the immortal degeneracies.
To extract the Fourier coeﬃcient from the product representation (5.13) of the counting function (5.14) using (11.7), we need to expand a typical term in the product of the form 1 (1 −prqsyt)2C0(4rs−t2) .
(11.8) where 2C0 is the Fourier coeﬃcient of the elliptic genus of a single copy of K3. Depending on whether |prqsyt| is less than one or greater than one, we expand the denominator using 1 1 −x = ( 1 + x + x2 + . . .
for |x| < 1 , −(x−1 + x−2 + x−3 + . . .) for |x| > 1 .
(11.9) We see that it is not a priori obvious that expanding ﬁrst in p is the same as using the attractor contour because if the powers of t are suﬃciently large and positive, the attractor contour may correspond to expanding some terms eﬀectively in p−1 instead of in p.
– 116 – To address this question we now show that for the terms that appear in the product representation, |prqsyt| is always less than one using the fact that C0(∆) = 0 for ∆< −1 .
(11.10) To begin with, the p-dependent terms with ∆= 0, −1 arise only for s = 0 and are of the form 1 (1 −py)2(1 −py−1)2(1 −pr)20 (11.11) These involve only single powers y or y−1 and positive powers of p. The absolute value of py or py−1 for the attractor contour goes as λ2m±l which is always much less than one for 0 ≤|l| < 2m.
The remaining p-dependent terms with s > 0 have ∆= 4rs −t2 > 0 and r > 0. The absolute value of prqsyt goes as λ2nr+2ms−ℓt .
(11.12) The exponent is most negative when ℓtakes its maximum positive value ℓmax = √ 2mn and t takes its maximum positive value tmax = √ 2rs. For black hole conﬁgurations with a smooth horizon, 4mn−ℓ2 > 0 because the classical area of the horizon is the square-root of this quantity.
Hence the most negative value of the exponent would be 2nr + 2ms −2√mnrs = 2(√nr −√ms)2 > 0 , (11.13) and the absolute value of prqsyt is always less than or equal to λ2(√nr−√ms)2 (11.14) which is always much less than one. This implies that to extract the attractor Fourier coeﬃ-cients, we expand all terms in the product in the small p expansion using (11.9) thus giving us the Jacobi form ψm of (1.1) as a partition function in the remaining two chemical potentials.
The degeneracies extracted from ψm(τ, z) still experience many wall-crossings, and we should now use the rest of the attractor contour to analyze the immortal part of the degeneracies of ψm. We do this in two steps by ﬁrst performing the inverse Fourier transform in z, and then in τ. For the ﬁrst step, we need to specify a contour for the imaginary part of z relative to that of τ. The conditions (11.6) on the imaginary parts of (τ, z) implies that Im(z) = −ℓ 2mIm(τ).
Since by moving the contour in a purely horizontal direction we do not cross any poles, we can add an arbitrary real part to z, which we can choose so that z = −ℓτ/2m. This gives the result of the ﬁrst integral to be: f ∗ m,ℓ(τ) = e−πil2τ/2m Z P+1 P ψm(τ, z) e−2πiℓz dz , P = −ℓτ/2m .
(11.15) – 117 – We then have to perform a τ integral with the contour speciﬁed by the attractor values (11.6), but since the integrand f ∗ m,ℓ(τ) is holomorphic in τ, the answer is independent of the contour.
We thus get the degeneracies d∗(n, ℓ, m) to be: d∗(n, ℓ, m) = Z eπiℓ2τ/2m f ∗ m,ℓ(τ) dτ , (11.16) where the integral is over an interval of length 1 for the ﬁxed imaginary value (11.6) of τ.
To extend to other values of ℓ, we use the spectral ﬂow invariance (11.5) and sum over all values of ℓto get a canonical partition function in the two variables (τ, z).
Because of the factor eπiℓ2τ/2m in (11.16), the sum over spectral-ﬂow images yields the function ϑm,l(τ, z).
Putting all this together, and comparing the above equations (11.15), (11.16) with our deﬁnition (8.3) of the ﬁnite part of a meromorphic Jacobi form, we see that the single centered black hole degeneracies are Fourier coeﬃcients of precisely the ﬁnite part of ψm as deﬁned in §8: X ℓmod (2m) f ∗ m,ℓ(τ) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) = ψF m(τ, z) .
(11.17) We see that the seemingly unconventional charge-dependent choice for the contour in §8 for deﬁning the ﬁnite part is completely natural from the point of view of the attractor mechanism (indeed, it was motivated there by these physical considerations). According to our analysis in §8, this ﬁnite part ψF m is a mock Jacobi form. This is one of the main conclusions of our analysis, so we summarize the entire discussion by the following concise statement: The degeneracies of single centered (immortal) black holes with magnetic charge invariant M 2/2 = m are Fourier coeﬃcients of a mock Jacobi form of index m.
We stress here that the converse is not true. The single centered black hole solution exists only when the discriminant 4mn −ℓ2 is positive, and its degeneracy grows exponentially for large values of the discriminant. On the other hand, as we saw in §4, any Jacobi form with exponential growth necessarily has negative discriminant states. This means that the partition function for single centered black holes alone with ﬁxed magnetic charge and varying electric charge cannot have good modular properties. Indeed the partition function ψF m does contain negative discriminant states for example for n < m. These low-lying states do not correspond to single centered black holes [31, 108].
We now turn to the physical interpretation of the polar part ψP m(τ, z) of the meromorphic Jacobi form deﬁned in (8.44). As mentioned in the introduction, the only multi-centered grav-itational conﬁgurations that contribute to the supersymmetric index of quarter-BPS dyons in our N = 4 string theory have exactly two centers [38] each of which is a half-BPS state. At a wall, one of these two-centered conﬁgurations decays. A basic decay at a wall-crossing is when one center is purely electric and the other is purely magnetic. Other decays are related to this – 118 – basic decay by duality [105]. For this two-centered conﬁguration, with one electric and one magnetic center, the indexed partition function after summing over the electric charges is: p24(m + 1) · 1 η24(τ) · X ℓ>0 ℓyℓ, (11.18) where the ﬁrst factor is the degeneracy of the half-BPS magnetic center, the second factor is the partition function of the electric center [39], and the third factor is the partition function counting the dimensions of the SU(2) multiplets with angular momentum (ℓ−1)/2 contained in the electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by the two centers [46] for which N · M = ℓ. The third factor is an expansion of the function y (1 −y)2 (11.19) in the range |q| < |y| < 1 (see equation (9.7)). Here we already see the basic wall-crossing of the theory because diﬀerent ways of expanding this meromorphic function for |y| < 1 and |y| > 1 will give diﬀerent degeneracies. Other wall-crossings are related to this basic wall-crossing by S-duality which as we have explained is nothing but spectral ﬂow for a given ﬁxed m. Thus the full partition function that captures all wall-crossings is obtained by ‘averaging’ over the spectral-ﬂow images of (11.19). This averaging is nothing but the averaging operation deﬁned in (9.3) and (9.4) Av(m)h y (y −1)2 i = qms2+sy2ms+1 (1 −qsy)2 (11.20) It is now easy to see that this averaging over spectral-ﬂow images gives exactly the polar part ψP m of the meromorphic Jacobi form ψm: p24(m + 1) η24(τ) X s∈Z qms2+sy2ms+1 (1 −qsy)2 = ψP m(τ, z) .
(11.21) This follows from the fact that the poles of ψm(τ, z) are exactly at z ∈Zτ + Z and the residue at z = 0 is p24(m + 1) η24(τ) .
as mentioned in (1.5).
We thus see that the decomposition theorem (8.3) as applied to our dyon partition func-tion ψm(τ, z) has a natural physical interpretation. It is simply the statement that the full partition function is a sum of its immortal and decaying constituents: ψm(τ, z) = ψF m(τ, z) + ψP m(τ, z) .
(11.22) The nontrivial part is of course the implication of such a decomposition for modularity. By separating part of the function ψm, we have evidently broken modularity, and ψF m(τ, z) is not a – 119 – Jacobi form any more. However, the decomposition theorem (8.3) guarantees that ψF m still has a very special modular behavior in that it is a mock Jacobi form. The mock behavior can be summarized by the following partial diﬀerential equation obeyed by its completion: τ 3/2 2 ∂ ∂τ b ψF m(τ, z) = r m 8πi p24(m + 1) ∆(τ) X ℓmod (2m) ϑm,ℓ(τ, 0) ϑm,ℓ(τ, z) .
(11.23) Note that ψP m also admits a completion c ψP m which is modular.
However, the function c ψP m, unlike c ψF m, is meromorphic, and therefore has wall-crossings. We refer the reader to the summary at the end of §8.3 for a detailed discussion of the relationship between meromorphy (in z), holomorphy (in τ) and modularity.
Let us now discuss the implications of these results for AdS2/CFT1 holography. The near horizon geometry of a supersymmetric black hole is a two-dimensional anti de Sitter space AdS2 and the dual theory is a one-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory CFT1. The partition function of this CFT1 is nothing but the integer d∗(n, ℓ, m) which gives the number of microstates of the black hole [106, 107]. Our results show that that these integers are the Fourier coeﬃcients of a mock modular form and as a result there is a hidden modular symmetry. Such a modular symmetry would make it possible to use powerful techniques such as the Hardy-Ramanujan-Rademacher expansion to process the integers d∗(n, ℓ, m) into a form that can be more readily identiﬁed with a bulk partition function of string theory in AdS2.
There has been recent progress in evaluating the bulk partition function using localization techniques which makes it possible to study the subleading nonperturbative corrections in the Rademacher expansion in a systematic way [34, 35, 70, 96]. It would be interesting to see if the additional terms in the Rademacher expansion arising from the ‘mock’ modular nature can be given a physical bulk interpretation.
11.2 Meromorphy, mock modularity, and noncompactness From the mathematical point of view, we have seen how the mock modularity of ψF m is a consequence of meromorphy of the Jacobi form ψm. In the N = 4 example above, we can understand the physical origin of this meromorphy as coming from the non-compactness of the underlying brane dynamics. To see this more clearly, we write the meromorphic Jacobi form ψm(τ, z) as ψm(τ, z) = 1 ϕ−2,1(τ, z) 1 ∆(τ) χ(τ, z; Symm+1(K3)) .
(11.24) The three factors in the above equations have the following physical interpretation [42]. The function ψm(τ, z) can be viewed as an indexed partition function of the following (0, 4) SCFT σ(TN) × σL( e K-n) × σ(Symm+1(K3)) .
(11.25) – 120 – Each CFT factor has a natural interpretation from the microscopic derivation of the dyon counting formula [42] using the 4d-5d lift [60]. The σL( e K-n) factor is the purely left-moving bosonic CFT associated with e K-n bound states of the Kaluza-Klein monopole with momentum.
The σ(TN) factor is a (4, 4) SCFT associated with the motion of the center of mass of motion in the Kaluza-Klein background in going from ﬁve dimensions to four dimensions in the 4d-5d lift. The σ(Symm+1(K3)) is the (4, 4) SCFT that is associated with the ﬁve-dimensional Strominger-Vafa Q1-Q5-n system. Note that the SCFT σ(TN) has a noncompact target space and the double pole of 1/ϕ−2,1(τ, z) can be traced back to this noncompactness.
Going over from the partition function to the Fourier coeﬃcients corresponds to going over from the canonical ensemble with ﬁxed z to the micro-canonical ensemble with ﬁxed ℓ. The Fourier coeﬃcient is supposed to count the number of right-moving ground-states in this ﬁxed charge sector. Right-moving states with nonzero energy cancel in pairs in this index. Now, counting ground states for a compact theory is a well-deﬁned operation. However, when the target-space is noncompact, the wavefunctions are not properly normalized without putting an infrared regulator in the target space. In the present context, the essential physics of the noncompactness is captured by the point particle motion of the center of mass in the Taub-NUT geometry. A simple regulator can be introduced by turning on the axion ﬁeld which according to (2.22) corresponds in the Type-IIB frame to taking the modulus UB = U1B + iU2B to have a small nonzero real part U1B [42]. This introduces a nonzero potential on the Taub-NUT geometry proportional to U 2 1BU2B that regulates the infrared behavior to give a well deﬁned counting problem [62, 100]. However, the index thus computed depends on the sign of U1B and jumps as U1B goes from being slightly negative to slightly positive. Indeed the partition function for these modes is precisely the function y (1 −y)2 (11.26) which can be expanded either in power of y or in powers of y−1 depending on whether U1B is positive or negative. For ℓpositive, there are ℓnormalizable states when U1B < 0 and none when U1B > 0. This is the essential source of the wall-crossing behavior in this context. We should emphasize that even though turning on U1B appears to make the problem eﬀectively compact, this is true only up to some maximal ℓmax which scales as U 2 1BU2B [62, 100]. For a given ℓpositive, one can always make the problem well-deﬁned with a compact target space by choosing the moduli so that ℓmax is larger than the ℓof interest. The partition function in that case is well-deﬁned without any poles and goes as y + 2y2 + . . . + . . . + ℓmaxyℓmax .
(11.27) However, if one wishes to compute the canonical partition function that sums over all ℓ, one has to essentially take U 2 1BU2B to go to inﬁnity which is what leads to the pole at y = 1 in – 121 – (11.26). This in essence is the origin of the meromorphy of the canonical counting function of the asymptotic states, and therefore indirectly also of the mock modularity of the immortal near-horizon counting function.
As we have seen, this meromorphy of the asymptotic counting function ψm implies that the counting function of the near-horizon immortal states cannot be both modular and holomor-phic at the same time. One can either have the holomorphic function ψF m which is not quite modular, or a modular function b ψF m which is not quite holomorphic. From this point of view, the shadow can be regarded as a ‘modular anomaly’ in ψF m or as a ‘holomorphic anomaly’ in the completion b ψF m.
A natural question that arises from this discussion is if the mock Jacobi form and the holomorphic anomaly can be given a direct physical interpretation rather than arrive at it via a meromorphic Jacobi form as we have done. To address this question, it is useful to view the problem from the perspective of AdS3 holography in M-theory as we now discuss.
11.3 The M-Theory limit and AdS3 holography From the perspective of AdS2/CFT1 holography discussed above, there is no a priori reason why the black hole degeneracy should have anything to do with modularity. It is only when we can view the black hole as an excitation of a black string that we can have an a priori physical expectation of modularity. This is because the near horizon geometry of a black string is a three-dimensional anti de Sitter space AdS3. The Euclidean thermal AdS3 has a conformal torus as a boundary whose complex structure parameter is τ. The partition function of the dual boundary conformal ﬁeld theory CFT2 depends on on τ. In this framework the modular symmetry is identiﬁed with the SL(2, Z) mapping class group of the boundary torus [86], whereas the elliptic symmetry is identiﬁed with large gauge transformations of the 3-form ﬁeld [44] as we have already discussed in §11.1.
We now describe how the quarter-BPS black holes considered thus far can be regarded as excitations of a black string in an appropriate M-theory frame. This will enable us to make contact with AdS3/CFT2 holography. The M-theory framework is natural also from the point of view of generalizing these considerations to BPS black holes in N = 2 compactiﬁcations on a general Calabi-Yau manifold X6.
To go to the M-theory frame, we consider the T 2 to be a product of two circles S1 × ˜ S1 and consider the charge conﬁguration (2.15) in the Type-IIB frame. We ﬁrst T-dualize the ˜ S circle to the ˆ S1 circle to go to the Type-IIA frame and then use mirror symmetry of K3 to map the Type-IIB conﬁguration (2.15) to a Type-IIA conﬁguration of D4-F1-n-NS5 charges.
We then lift it to M-theory to obtain a charge conﬁguration consisting of M5-M2 bound states carrying momentum along S1. This conﬁguration now has M5-branes wrapping D × S1 where D is a divisor in K3 × ˆ T 2, an M2-brane wrapping the ˆ T 2 = ˆ S1 × S1 m, with some momentum along S1. This is a precisely a conﬁguration of the kind considered by Maldacena, Strominger, – 122 – and Witten [87]. Since all M5-branes wrap S1 and the momentum is along S1, it is natural ﬂip S1 m and S1 and regard the S1 as the new M-circle. In the limit when the radius R of the new M-circle S1 is very large, the low-lying excitations of this M5-brane are described by the MSW string wrapping the M-circle. To write the ﬁnal conﬁguration in the M-theory frame, let C1 to be the homology 2-cycle of the ˆ T 2, and let C2 and C3 be two 2-cycles in K3 with intersection matrix  0 1 1 0  .
(11.28) The intersection number of these three 2-cycles is Z K3× ˆ T 2 C1 ∧C2 ∧C3 = 1 .
(11.29) Let {Da} be the 4-cycles dual to {Ca}, Da ∩Cb = δb a . In this basis, the M5-brane is wrapping the 4-cycle D = 3 X a=1 paDa with p1 = ˜ K, p2 = Q1 and p3 = Q5. The M2-brane charges are q2 = q3 = 0 and q1 = ˜ n, and M-momentum or equivalently the D0-brane charge from the Type-IIA perspective is q0 = n.
Using this notation we see that • The electric charges in (2.15) map to n units of momentum along the M-circle S1, and ˜ K M5-branes wrapping D1 × S1.
• The magnetic charges in (2.15) map to Q1 M5-branes wrapping D2 × S1, Q5 M5-branes wrapping D3 × S1, and ˜ n M2-branes wrapping ˆ T 2.
In summary, the charge conﬁguration of our interest is Γ =  N M  =  0, n; 0, ˜ K Q1, ˜ n; Q5, 0  B =  0, q0; 0, p1 p2, q1; p3, 0  M (11.30) Reduction of this charge conﬁgurations along S1 gives a conﬁguration in Type-IIA frame con-sisting of only D4-D2-D0-branes.
Since the eﬀective MSW string wraps the M-circle, we have to take the radius R of this circle to be large keeping other scales ﬁxed to obtain an AdS3 near-horizon geometry of a long black string. This implies that in the original heterotic frame in which we have labeled the charges (2.3), the radius R goes to inﬁnity keeping other scales and moduli ﬁxed. Since the 2-torus in the heterotic frame is also a simple product of two circles S1 × ˜ S1, the moduli in (2.20) take the form Gij =  ˜ R2 0 0 R2  , Bij = 0 (11.31) – 123 – which implies that for the three moduli S, T, U we have S = a + iR ˜ R g2 6 , T = iR ˜ R , U = i R ˜ R , (11.32) where g6 is the six-dimensional string coupling constant of heterotic compactiﬁed on T 4 and we have allowed a nonzero axion ﬁeld a. This means in particular that S2 ∼R, T2 ∼R, U2 ∼R (11.33) and for the charge conﬁguration (11.30), the central charge matrix scales as Z ∼  R 0 0 0  + 1 R  2n ℓ+ ag2 6/ ˜ R ℓ+ ag2 6/ ˜ R 2m + (Q2 1/ ˜ R2 + Q2 5 ˜ R2)  .
(11.34) From the contour prescription (6.10), we conclude that the imaginary parts for the Fourier integral scale as Im(σ) ∼R (11.35) Im(τ) ∼1/R (11.36) Im(z) ∼1/R .
(11.37) Therefore, in the region of the moduli space corresponding to the M-theory limit, p := exp (2πiσ) is becoming much smaller compared to q := exp (2πiτ) and y := exp (2πiz). Hence one must ﬁrst expand around p = 0: 1 Φ10(Ω) = ∞ X m=−1 pmψm(τ, z) .
(11.38) Since the function Φ10(Ω) has double zeros at z = 0, the function ψm(τ, z) is meromorphic with double poles at z = 0 and its translates.
We conclude that the function ψm(τ, z) can be interpreted as the asymptotic partition function for counting the BPS excitation of this MSW M5-brane for ﬁxed value of the magnetic charge M 2/2 = m and is a meromorphic Jacobi form of weight −10 and index m. This is the essential new ingredient compared to other situations encountered earlier such as the partition function of the D1-D5 string [118] which is a holomorphic weak Jacobi form28.
Note that ψm(τ, z) is the asymptotic counting function in the canonical ensemble for a ﬁxed chemical potential z where one sums over all M2-brane charges ℓfor a ﬁxed chemical potential z. To obtain the micro-canonical partition function for a ﬁxed M2-brane charge, one 28Here we mean holomorphic or meromorphic in the z variable that is conjugate to ℓ. This should not be confused with the nomenclature used in §4 while discussing growth conditions (4.5).
– 124 – has to perform the Fourier integral in z. There is an inﬁnity of double poles in the z plane at z = ατ for α ∈Z. The z contour can be made to lie between the poles at (α −1)τ and ατ depending on how Im(z) compares with Im(τ) given the O(1/R) terms in the central charge matrix (11.34). It is easy to see that by varying the moduli, the contour can be made to cross all poles. Thus, there are an inﬁnity of walls still accessible in the regime when the radius of the M-circle becomes large.
Σ Figure 1: The diagram on the left shows the moduli space projected onto the Σ upper-half plane divided into chambers separated by walls where a quarter-BPS state decays into two half-BPS states.
The M-theory limit, shown on the right, corresponds to taking Im(Σ) to be very large. In this limit several walls are no longer visible. There are still an inﬁnite number of walls which can be crossed by varying Re(Σ). Spectral ﬂow transformation maps one chamber to another chamber.
To display this graphically it is useful to deﬁne a complex scalar ﬁeld Σ = Σ1 + iΣ2 by Z ∼1 Σ2  |Σ|2 Σ1 Σ1 1  .
(11.39) For ﬁxed charges, the MSW region which corresponds to taking Σ2 large with Σ1 ﬁxed corre-sponding to vanishing axion. Varying Σ1 allows one to access the inﬁnite number of chambers separated by walls as shown in Fig. 1. Degeneracies in these diﬀerent chambers can be obtained simply by choosing the Fourier contour in z for an appropriate value of α. Note that the ﬁeld Σ1 depends both on the moduli and on the charges and thus varies as moduli are varied for ﬁxed charges or as the charges are varied for ﬁxed moduli. In particular, even for ﬁxed values of moduli, one can cross all walls by varying ℓappropriately.
With this embedding into M-theory, we now outline what we regard as a consistent physical picture to interpret b ψF m even though we do not yet fully understand the details. In the limit – 125 – of large radius R, we eﬀectively have a ﬁve-dimensional theory obtained from compactifying M-theory on K3 × ˆ T 2. For a given a set of M5-brane charges {pi} at asymptotic inﬁnity, the ﬁve-dimensional supergravity admits a single-centered black string solution carrying magnetic charges {pi}. The near horizon geometry of this solution is an AdS3 geometry where all vec-tor multiplet moduli of the ﬁve-dimensional supergravity are ﬁxed to their attractor values.
Following the usual reasoning of holography, we expect that the superconformal ﬁeld theory describing the low energy excitations of the M5-brane will be dual to this near horizon AdS3.
The indexed partition function of this SCFT is expected to describe the BPS gravitational conﬁgurations inside the AdS3.
What is the indexed partition function of this SCFT? It cannot possibly be the meromorphic Jacobi form ψm that exhibits many wall-crossings, because all vector-multiplet moduli are ﬁxed in the attractor AdS3 geometry and no wall-crossings are possible. It cannot possibly be ψF m, because it is not modular as would be expected from the symmetry under the SL(2, Z) mapping class group of the boundary torus. We propose that the most natural object to identify with the indexed partition function of the SCFT2 dual to the AdS3 is the modular completion b ψF m(τ, z).
It satisﬁes (in a rather nontrivial way) both requirements of being properly modular and not having any wall-crossings. The non-holomorphy is not something that we would naively expect for the indexed partition function but this can be a reﬂection of noncompactness as we comment upon later. The quarter-BPS black holes discussed in this paper are excitations inside this single AdS3 represented as BTZ black holes and their degeneracies should then be captured by the Fourier coeﬃcients of ψF m(τ, z) which is indeed the case for n > m.
This microscopic picture is consistent with the macroscopic analysis of multi-centered black string solutions [45] of ﬁve dimensional supergravity.
These solutions can be obtained by lifting multi-centered black hole solutions of four-dimensional supergravity. According to this supergravity analysis, given a set of asymptotic magnetic charges {pi} of a wrapped M5-brane, the single-centered AdS3 throat described above is not the only allowed solution [45]. There exist multi-centered solutions with multiple AdS3 throats with the same total asymptotic charge.
Now, as we have seen from the microscopic analysis, there are still inﬁnite chambers separated by walls visible in the M-theory limit as shown in Fig 1. These chambers can thus correspond to chambers in which diﬀerent multi-string conﬁgurations exist as stable solutions. The wall-crossings can result not from decays of multi-centered black holes inside a single AdS3 throat but from the decays of these multi-string solutions. Thus, it is reasonable to identify b ψF m, which has no wall-crossings, with the (indexed) partition function of the CFT dual to the single AdS3 throat.
11.4 Open problems and comments The interpretation of b ψF m(τ, z) proposed above raises a number of interesting questions. The essentially new feature of our proposal is the fact that the modular partition function b ψF m(τ, z) is – 126 – nonholomorphic and correspondingly the holomorphic counting function ψF m is mock modular.
It would clearly be important to understand the physical origin of this nonholomorphy and mock modularity from the boundary and bulk perspectives.
• Mock modularity from the boundary perspective: We have seen in §11.2 that the mock modularity of ψF m is tied to the noncompactness of the asymptotic SCFT. A more interesting question is to understand this mock modularity directly from the point of view of the near horizon SCFT. It is natural to assume that the near horizon SCFT is also noncompact and this noncompactness is what is responsible for the mock modularity. The connection between mock modularity/nonholomorphy and noncompactness has been noted earlier in physics. For example, the partition function of topological SO(3) N = 4 Yang-Mills theory on CP2 is a mock modular form and it was suggested in [120] that it is related to the noncompactness of ﬂat directions in ﬁeld space. The nonholomorphy of the elliptic genus has also been noted in the context of superconformal ﬁeld theories [54, 119] with the noncompact SL(2, R)/U(1) target space.
In this context, the nonholomorphy can be understood in complete detail [119, 4] as a consequence of the continuum of spectrum of the noncompact SCFT. It would be interesting to see if the holomorphic anomaly (11.23) of the completion of b ψF m can be understood from such a path integral perspective of the conformal ﬁeld theory.
In the framework of AdS2 holography, the quantity of interest is the integer d∗(n, m, ℓ) which is identiﬁed with the partition function of the boundary CFT. Using the fact that the completion b ψF m(τ, z) is modular, it should be possible to develop a Rademacher-like expansion for the d∗(n, m, ℓ) along the lines of [13, 14, 15]. This method has been used to prove that the black hole degeneracies are positive integers [19].
• Mock modularity from the bulk perspective: If mock modularity is indeed a consequence of the noncompactness of the boundary CFT, what are the implications of this noncompactness in the bulk AdS3? In particular, if the spectrum of conformal dimensions is continuous, then the bulk theory must have a continuum of masses. Perhaps these are to be identiﬁed with some extended long-string like excitations. It would be interesting to see if the mock modularity of the elliptic genus can be understood in terms of such bulk excitations. Indeed, recent investigations seem to indicate that the bulk string partition function in string theories [71] based on the non-compact SL(2, R)/U(1) CFT [64, 94] show a mock modular behavior.
The M-theory limit corresponds to the attractor contour for n > m and 0 ≤ℓ< 2m but the converse is not necessarily true, as explained in §11.1.
For n ≤m, we have the possibility that there will be multi-centered conﬁgurations. In particular, if n ≤m, – 127 – then even if ℓ< 2m, it is possible to have states with non-positive discriminant (∆= 4mn −ℓ2 ≤0). Since, the discriminant must be positive for a black hole horizon, such states cannot possibly correspond to single-centered black holes and must be realized in supergravity as multi-centered conﬁgurations if there are smooth solutions corresponding to them at all. Hence, if b ψF m is indeed the elliptic genus of a single-centered AdS3, then there must be supergravity conﬁgurations corresponding to these states for n ≤m that ﬁt inside a single AdS3.
This microscopic prediction is plausible from the supergravity perspective. According to [45], all two-centered black hole solutions where each center is a D4-D2 bound state, are scaled out of a single AdS3 throat. However, the two-centered solutions that have one center carrying D6-brane charge and the other carrying anti-D6-brane charge can continue to exist as stable solutions inside a single AdS3. Such conﬁgurations can give the supergravity realization of the negative discriminant states. Further analysis is required to verify these consequences of our proposed interpretation of b ψF m.
• Generalization to N = 2 compactiﬁcations: One motivation for the present investigation is to abstract some general lessons which could be applicable to the more challenging case of dyons in N = 2 compactiﬁcations on a general Calabi-Yau three-fold. In the N = 4 case, the mock modularity of ψF m was a consequence of meromorphy of ψm. As we have seen in §11.2, this meromorphy is in turn a consequence of noncompactness of Taub-NUT factor σ(TN) in the asymptotic SCFT (11.25)29. This suggests that the SCFT dual to the near horizon AdS3 is also noncompact.
In the N = 2 context also, there is no a priori reason to expect that the MSW SCFT will be compact in general everywhere in the moduli space. If this SCFT is noncompact, then our results suggest that mock Jacobi forms would provide the right framework for making the holographic SL(2, Z) symmetry manifest for the indexed partition function considered, for example, in [49, 44, 89]. In the N = 4 case, the mock modularity is closely correlated with the wall-crossing phenomenon. The wall-crossing phenomenon in N = 2 case corresponds to jumps in the Donaldson-Thomas invariants and is known to be much more complicated [48, 78, 76, 88]. It would be interesting though to deﬁne the analog of the counting function for the immortal degeneracies in this case. Since these degeneracies do not change under wall-crossing, such a counting function is likely to have an interesting mathematical interpretation. Moreover, it is expected to have nice (mock) modular properties from the considerations of holography discussed above.
29Note that this is not to be confused with R3 factor corresponding to the center of mass motion. It corresponds to the relative motion of the KK-monopole and the D1D5 system [42] and thus would belong to what is called the “entropic” factor [92] for the MSW string in the M-theory frame.
– 128 – • Mock modularity and indeﬁnite theta series: Mock modular forms appear in Zwegers’s work as members of three quite diﬀerent families of functions: 1. Fourier coeﬃcients of meromorphic Jacobi forms, 2. Appell-Lerch sums, 3. Indeﬁnite theta series.
We have seen that the ﬁrst two families appear naturally in the context of black hole physics with natural physical interpretations.
This suggests that the indeﬁnite theta series could also play a role in this physical context. It would be interesting to develop this connection further. For some earlier work in this direction, see [90, 1].
Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge useful conversations with Kathrin Bringmann, Miranda Cheng, Jan de Boer, Rajesh Gopakumar, JeﬀHarvey, Jan Manschot, Shiraz Minwalla, Boris Pioline, Jan Troost, Erik Verlinde, Sander Zwegers, and especially Ashoke Sen. We would also like to thank Alexander Weisse for technical help. It is a pleasure to thank the organizers of the 2007 workshop on ‘Black Holes and Modular Forms’ in Paris and of the 2008 workshop on ‘Number Theory and Physics at Crossroads’ in Banﬀfor hospitality where this research was initiated.
The work of A. D. was supported in part by the Excellence Chair of the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR). The work of S. M. was supported by the ERC Advanced Grant no. 246974, “Supersymmetry: a window to non-perturbative physics”.
v2: The work of A. D. was conducted within the framework of the ILP LABEX (ANR-10-LABX-63) supported by French state funds managed by the ANR within the Investissements d’Avenir programme under reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02. S. M. would like to thank the SFTC for support from Consolidated grant number ST/J002798/1.
– 129 – A. Appendix: Tables of special mock Jacobi forms This appendix contains three collections of tables. The ﬁrst gives the ﬁrst Fourier coeﬃcients of the weight 2 mock Jacobi forms QM for all products of two primes less than 50, the second gives coeﬃcients of the primitive mock Jacobi forms Φ0 1,m for all known cases having optimal growth, and the third gives coeﬃcients of the weight 1 mock Jacobi forms QM for all products of three primes less than 150.
A.1 Table of QM (weight 2 case) For each M with µ(M) = 1 with 1 < M < 50 we tabulate the value of cM and the Fourier coeﬃcients c(FM; n, rmin) for n ranging from 0 to some limit and all values of rmin, (deﬁned as the minimal positive representatives prime to M of their squares modulo 4M). Here cM is the smallest positive rational number such that FM = −cMQM has integral coeﬃcients, as deﬁned in (9.52). The asterisk before a value of rmin means that the corresponding row contains at least one negative non-polar coeﬃcient.
M = 6 cM = 12 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 −1 35 130 273 595 1001 1885 2925 4886 7410 11466 16660 24955 M = 10 cM = 6 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −1 21 63 112 207 306 511 693 1071 1442 2037 2709 3766 4788 3 0 9 35 57 126 154 315 378 625 819 1233 1491 2268 2772 M = 14 cM = 4 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −1 15 42 65 120 150 255 312 465 575 819 975 1355 1605 3 0 10 30 51 85 120 195 230 360 465 598 765 1065 1235 5 0 3 15 20 51 45 113 105 195 215 345 348 595 615 M = 15 cM = 3 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −1 14 29 54 83 128 172 230 331 430 537 726 924 1116 1409 2 0 4 24 28 58 52 136 120 224 232 376 368 626 632 920 4 0 10 28 40 88 98 176 208 304 386 552 632 888 1050 1372 7 0 2 9 26 36 50 84 116 155 226 269 340 488 580 712 – 130 – M = 21 cM = 2 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 8 15 32 40 56 79 96 135 176 191 248 336 368 434 576 2 0 8 26 28 56 64 112 104 180 184 272 300 416 432 606 636 4 0 2 12 8 32 14 60 40 80 64 148 96 208 166 272 268 5 0 8 17 32 49 64 85 120 150 200 241 288 374 448 534 656 8 0 2 12 20 32 38 76 72 112 138 176 200 304 302 408 472 11 0 0 3 8 11 24 26 32 59 64 74 112 138 144 189 248 M = 22 cM = 12 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −5 49 132 176 308 357 572 604 951 1061 1391 1572 2227 2325 3 0 44 103 169 272 301 536 580 771 976 1307 1380 2004 2121 5 0 25 91 116 223 229 427 405 716 700 1071 1121 1608 1633 7 0 13 48 79 127 180 272 272 452 549 632 764 1120 1133 9 0 1 23 24 91 25 180 92 247 205 403 229 715 453 M = 26 cM = 2 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 9 21 30 51 54 87 96 138 149 207 219 308 315 399 468 3 0 7 21 27 43 51 90 76 132 144 183 201 297 283 393 423 5 0 6 15 23 39 42 69 75 102 128 165 165 243 258 324 371 7 0 3 12 14 33 27 57 51 90 84 132 126 201 183 261 267 9 0 1 6 12 15 21 36 34 57 63 70 93 138 118 162 210 11 0 0 3 2 12 3 26 6 30 24 57 15 86 45 87 81 M = 33 cM = 6 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −5 33 55 127 127 160 242 259 347 468 468 534 749 826 903 2 0 21 66 43 142 120 252 174 340 262 526 394 658 580 844 4 0 24 88 88 165 154 286 244 418 376 572 596 869 728 1122 5 0 14 36 47 80 113 113 160 215 259 229 372 460 386 507 7 0 33 44 99 143 167 209 308 365 440 506 541 748 847 915 * 8 0 −4 29 18 62 −4 146 −8 124 76 234 54 336 116 380 10 0 11 50 66 116 110 248 220 292 358 474 435 738 622 892 13 0 0 21 54 77 120 131 153 230 273 317 405 482 548 613 16 0 0 3 22 58 36 94 124 127 146 248 182 350 380 408 19 0 0 0 7 18 7 40 40 58 113 58 113 186 153 120 – 131 – M = 34 cM = 3 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −2 14 36 43 69 82 123 117 183 195 253 252 364 352 481 3 0 13 29 44 77 61 125 116 164 185 244 234 381 334 427 5 0 11 28 39 59 67 106 107 162 157 214 242 321 306 391 7 0 7 26 28 53 54 100 74 149 144 194 177 292 252 378 9 0 5 14 27 41 43 79 72 92 125 165 141 236 234 262 11 0 1 13 12 36 26 57 43 100 69 124 100 196 140 236 13 0 0 5 12 16 18 34 32 54 65 53 85 128 80 139 * 15 0 0 2 1 13 −2 35 0 29 14 59 −2 94 28 72 M = 35 cM = 1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 10 14 18 31 44 49 60 76 86 98 134 147 168 200 226 * 2 0 −2 8 4 14 −2 24 8 30 12 56 0 70 22 72 44 3 0 2 6 16 11 18 24 26 43 50 44 58 84 70 93 124 4 0 6 10 16 28 26 46 40 56 70 90 96 128 128 152 176 6 0 6 16 16 30 32 56 52 78 80 104 108 152 150 208 216 8 0 2 10 8 20 12 42 24 52 40 74 48 104 90 122 120 9 0 2 3 8 14 18 17 16 30 42 39 58 69 60 71 100 11 0 2 5 16 22 20 30 42 52 68 67 84 114 118 121 166 13 0 0 5 10 9 18 24 34 33 42 59 52 79 92 99 126 16 0 0 2 0 12 12 16 8 28 18 50 40 56 36 88 56 18 0 0 0 4 6 6 24 8 30 24 32 40 64 46 80 80 23 0 0 0 0 1 2 5 8 7 16 11 8 33 26 19 50 M = 38 cM = 4 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −3 21 44 59 103 97 159 149 238 240 322 300 465 445 540 3 0 16 46 62 80 102 166 138 226 231 287 318 449 391 559 5 0 15 43 48 91 75 151 148 194 208 303 269 427 354 512 7 0 14 29 43 82 83 119 117 179 197 256 252 360 358 433 9 0 6 30 36 61 55 124 77 179 165 201 193 360 256 404 11 0 4 16 31 47 45 88 91 108 136 168 155 257 254 300 13 0 0 14 14 40 26 72 45 103 64 169 105 207 137 249 15 0 0 5 11 14 29 43 25 57 75 58 76 160 88 133 * 17 0 0 1 1 20 −7 33 −5 47 21 60 −14 109 15 83 – 132 – M = 39 cM = 1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 6 8 16 22 26 31 42 47 60 72 72 94 110 115 154 2 0 4 14 16 26 20 52 32 64 60 86 76 128 100 148 152 4 0 2 12 6 20 16 36 22 48 32 68 46 96 66 124 86 5 0 6 11 18 22 34 37 44 64 66 71 102 116 120 137 170 7 0 2 3 10 12 12 16 18 28 42 28 40 64 44 57 88 8 0 4 12 12 28 22 44 40 56 62 88 74 120 108 156 148 * 10 0 0 4 0 10 −4 22 4 18 0 36 0 46 16 42 24 11 0 2 7 16 17 24 34 36 47 66 62 76 107 104 117 154 14 0 0 6 8 14 20 28 24 46 40 62 60 86 72 118 116 17 0 0 1 6 10 12 15 24 31 34 35 44 61 72 71 86 20 0 0 0 2 4 6 16 8 16 20 24 30 48 32 44 60 23 0 0 0 0 1 4 3 2 11 12 4 18 19 6 25 32 M = 46 cM = 12 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −11 57 161 184 276 299 483 414 667 644 874 897 1219 1023 3 0 69 115 184 299 253 493 437 585 690 838 736 1288 1127 5 0 46 138 147 299 285 414 368 667 607 782 676 1205 1044 7 0 46 123 161 215 230 414 353 560 575 744 790 1043 905 9 0 30 92 138 230 168 421 329 467 444 766 559 1065 766 11 0 23 75 98 167 230 282 276 443 443 558 535 817 765 13 0 5 69 69 166 120 281 143 442 350 465 424 810 516 15 0 0 27 73 119 92 211 188 211 349 376 303 606 487 17 0 0 26 26 92 26 187 95 256 121 325 233 466 236 19 0 0 2 23 25 71 94 48 163 163 96 140 349 188 * 21 0 0 0 1 47 −22 93 −22 70 1 208 −68 324 −21 – 133 – A.2 Table of Φ0 1,m of optimal growth We give the Fourier coeﬃcients of the primitive weight 1 mock Jacobi form Φ0 1,m for the fourteen known values of m for which it has optimal growth, in the same format as was used in the k = 2 case above. The number c is the factor relating the true value of Φ0 1,m to the form whose coeﬃcients have been tabulated, and which has been normalized to have integral Fourier coeﬃcients with no common factor except for the values C(∆= 0, r), which are allowed to have a denominator of 2. (This happens for the indices 9, 16, 18, and 25.) m = 2 c = 24 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 −1 45 231 770 2277 5796 13915 30843 65550 132825 260568 494385 m = 3 c = 12 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −1 16 55 144 330 704 1397 2640 4819 8480 14509 24288 39765 63888 2 0 10 44 110 280 572 1200 2244 4180 7348 12772 21330 35288 56760 m = 4 c = 8 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −1 7 21 43 94 168 308 525 882 1407 2255 3468 5306 7931 11766 2 0 8 24 56 112 216 392 672 1128 1840 2912 4536 6936 10416 15456 3 0 3 14 28 69 119 239 393 693 1106 1806 2772 4333 6468 9710 m = 5 c = 6 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 4 9 20 35 60 104 164 255 396 590 864 1259 1800 2541 3560 2 0 5 15 26 54 90 156 244 396 590 905 1320 1934 2751 3924 5456 3 0 4 11 24 45 80 135 220 350 540 810 1204 1761 2524 3586 5040 4 0 1 6 10 25 36 76 110 189 280 446 636 970 1360 1980 2750 – 134 – m = 6 c = 24 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −5 7 26 33 71 109 185 249 418 582 858 1184 1703 2291 3213 2 0 24 48 96 168 264 432 672 984 1464 2112 2976 4200 5808 7920 3 0 12 36 60 120 180 312 456 720 1020 1524 2124 3036 4140 5760 4 0 12 36 72 120 216 348 528 816 1212 1752 2520 3552 4920 6792 5 0 1 13 14 51 53 127 155 291 382 618 798 1256 1637 2369 m = 7 c = 4 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 2 3 5 10 15 21 34 48 65 94 129 175 237 312 413 2 0 2 6 10 16 24 40 54 84 116 164 222 310 406 552 722 3 0 3 6 11 18 29 45 66 95 137 192 264 361 486 650 862 4 0 2 6 8 18 24 42 58 90 122 180 240 338 448 612 794 5 0 1 3 7 11 18 28 41 63 91 125 177 245 328 441 590 6 0 0 2 2 6 6 16 18 32 40 66 80 126 156 224 286 m = 8 c = 4 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 1 2 4 6 7 14 18 25 35 48 63 87 110 146 190 2 0 2 4 6 10 16 22 32 46 62 86 116 152 202 264 340 3 0 2 5 7 13 18 29 38 58 77 108 141 195 250 333 424 4 0 2 4 8 12 18 28 40 56 80 108 144 196 258 336 440 5 0 1 4 5 11 14 24 32 50 63 94 122 170 215 294 371 6 0 0 2 4 6 10 16 22 32 46 62 86 116 152 202 264 7 0 0 1 1 4 3 9 8 17 20 33 36 60 70 101 124 m = 9 c = 3 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 0 2 2 3 6 8 10 15 20 27 36 46 58 78 98 2 0 2 3 4 8 9 15 20 27 37 51 63 87 109 142 178 3 0 2 3 6 9 12 18 26 36 48 63 84 111 144 183 234 4 0 1 4 5 9 13 21 25 39 50 70 90 122 151 202 251 5 0 2 3 6 8 12 18 26 34 48 65 84 112 146 186 240 6 0 1 2 3 3 7 9 15 18 30 36 54 66 93 115 156 192 7 0 0 1 2 4 6 9 12 19 26 33 46 62 78 103 134 8 0 0 1 1 3 1 6 5 10 10 18 19 33 35 52 60 – 135 – m = 10 c = 8 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −3 3 1 2 5 10 9 15 19 26 31 41 52 76 87 108 2 0 4 8 16 16 28 40 48 72 96 120 160 208 256 328 416 3 0 1 7 7 16 14 27 32 51 57 87 101 144 166 226 269 4 0 8 12 16 28 40 56 80 104 136 184 240 304 392 496 624 5 0 2 6 8 14 18 30 34 54 68 92 114 158 190 252 308 6 0 4 8 16 24 32 48 64 88 124 160 208 272 348 440 560 7 0 0 5 3 11 8 22 23 40 39 69 75 113 128 182 210 8 0 0 4 8 8 16 24 32 44 64 80 104 144 176 232 296 * 9 0 0 1 −1 5 2 9 2 13 11 23 18 43 37 60 60 m = 12 c = 8 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 ∗1 −3 −2 1 −1 −2 −2 1 −5 −1 −7 −5 −6 −5 −16 −10 −16 2 0 4 4 8 12 12 20 28 32 44 56 68 88 112 132 164 3 0 4 8 8 16 20 28 32 48 60 80 92 124 148 188 224 4 0 2 4 6 8 12 16 20 28 36 44 58 72 88 112 136 5 0 3 5 9 13 14 24 31 40 51 66 80 109 130 162 199 6 0 4 8 12 16 24 32 44 56 72 96 120 152 188 232 288 7 0 1 6 5 11 14 22 21 39 43 61 71 98 111 152 174 8 0 0 2 4 6 8 12 16 20 28 36 44 58 72 88 112 9 0 0 4 4 12 8 20 20 36 36 56 64 92 100 144 160 10 0 0 0 4 4 8 12 12 20 28 32 44 56 68 88 112 ∗11 0 0 0 −1 1 −3 1 −2 0 −5 0 −9 2 −8 −7 −14 – 136 – m = 13 c = 2 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 1 1 0 1 1 2 3 3 4 6 7 7 10 12 14 2 0 0 1 2 2 3 4 4 6 8 10 12 16 18 24 28 3 0 1 1 2 3 4 5 7 9 11 13 17 22 26 32 39 4 0 1 2 2 4 4 6 8 11 12 18 20 26 32 40 46 5 0 1 2 3 3 5 7 8 11 15 18 23 29 34 43 53 6 0 1 2 2 4 4 8 8 12 14 19 22 30 34 44 52 7 0 1 1 2 4 5 6 8 11 13 17 22 27 34 41 51 8 0 0 2 2 3 3 6 6 10 12 16 18 26 28 38 44 9 0 0 1 2 2 3 4 6 7 10 13 15 20 25 30 37 10 0 0 1 0 2 2 4 4 6 6 10 10 16 17 24 26 11 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 4 5 5 8 10 11 14 18 12 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 2 1 4 2 6 4 8 8 m = 16 c = 2 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 1 1 2 3 3 4 5 5 2 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 5 7 7 9 11 3 0 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 5 7 7 9 11 13 15 4 0 1 1 1 2 3 3 4 5 6 8 9 11 14 16 19 5 0 0 1 2 2 2 4 4 6 7 9 10 14 14 19 22 6 0 1 1 2 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 11 14 17 20 24 7 0 1 2 1 3 3 4 5 7 7 10 11 15 17 21 23 8 0 1 2 1 2 2 3 4 4 6 8 9 12 14 16 20 24 9 0 0 1 1 2 2 4 4 6 6 9 10 14 14 19 22 10 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 11 14 17 20 11 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 2 5 5 7 7 11 11 15 16 12 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 3 3 4 5 6 8 9 11 14 13 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 1 3 2 4 4 6 6 9 9 14 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 5 7 15 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 2 0 3 1 3 2 – 137 – m = 18 c = 3 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 * 1 −2 0 −1 0 −1 2 1 0 0 1 0 3 1 3 2 4 2 0 3 0 3 3 3 3 6 6 6 9 9 12 15 15 21 * 3 0 −1 2 1 1 0 3 1 4 2 5 5 7 4 9 8 4 0 0 3 3 3 6 6 6 12 12 15 18 21 24 30 36 5 0 2 1 1 2 3 3 3 4 6 5 6 9 11 12 13 6 0 3 3 3 6 6 9 12 12 15 18 24 27 33 39 45 * 7 0 −1 1 0 3 1 3 2 6 4 8 7 11 8 15 15 8 0 3 3 6 6 6 9 12 12 18 21 24 30 36 39 48 9 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 5 5 7 7 10 11 14 15 10 0 0 3 3 3 6 9 9 12 15 18 21 27 30 39 45 11 0 0 2 1 3 0 4 3 5 3 7 5 10 8 14 12 12 0 0 3 2 3 3 6 6 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 30 36 * 13 0 0 0 −1 1 1 2 0 3 3 4 3 8 6 9 8 14 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 6 6 9 9 9 15 18 18 24 * 15 0 0 0 0 2 −1 1 1 3 0 4 1 5 2 5 4 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 3 3 3 6 6 6 9 12 * 17 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 2 −1 1 0 3 1 3 0 – 138 – m = 25 c = 1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 4 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 5 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 6 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 7 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 8 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 3 5 5 9 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 10 0 1 2 1 0 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 11 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 2 3 4 4 5 6 12 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 13 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 5 5 14 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 3 5 5 15 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 4 5 16 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 17 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 18 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 3 3 19 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 20 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 22 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 24 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 A.3 Table of QM (weight 1 case) We give the coeﬃcients of QM for all products of three primes less than 150 for which QM.
We also show the factor cM relating QM to FM and the minimal discriminant of FM, since it is no longer assumed to be −1. This time an asterisk means simply that the corresponding row contains (non-polar) coeﬃcients of opposite signs, since here there are many examples of values of r (mod 2m) for which the scalar factor κr that determines the sign of the coeﬃcients C(∆, r) for large ∆is negative rather than positive for r = rmin.
– 139 – M = 30 cM = 3 ∆min = −1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 1 1 2 1 3 2 3 3 5 3 6 5 7 7 9 7 0 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 6 5 7 8 9 9 12 12 M = 42 cM = 2 ∆min = −1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 −1 0 −1 −1 −1 0 −2 −1 −2 −1 −2 −1 −3 −2 −3 5 0 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 3 2 4 4 4 4 11 0 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 2 3 3 4 4 5 4 6 M = 66 cM = 12 ∆min = −25 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 −5 −5 −15 −60 −125 −313 −620 −1270 −2358 −4394 −7698 5 −1 15 65 175 450 989 2105 4140 7930 14508 25915 7 0 16 55 155 385 852 1816 3597 6880 12645 22627 13 0 5 22 60 155 357 781 1567 3070 5725 10367 19 0 0 −5 −33 −99 −268 −605 −1320 −2623 −5104 −9398 M = 70 cM = 1 ∆min = −1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 0 −1 −1 0 0 −1 0 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 0 −1 −1 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 9 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 11 0 −1 0 0 0 −1 0 −1 0 0 0 −1 0 −1 0 −1 13 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 23 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 M = 78 cM = 1 ∆min = −1 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 −1 0 0 −1 −1 0 0 −1 0 0 −1 0 −1 −1 −1 −1 5 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 7 0 −1 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 −1 0 0 0 −1 0 0 11 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 23 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 – 140 – M = 102 cM = 6 ∆min = −25 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 −3 −1 −8 −14 −31 −56 −102 −173 −293 −461 −732 −1129 5 −1 7 16 41 76 153 262 454 745 1215 1886 2941 7 0 3 12 21 45 76 146 236 408 636 1024 1555 11 0 3 13 26 59 103 197 327 560 890 1427 2187 13 0 6 15 31 68 125 229 389 657 1055 1688 2603 19 0 2 7 16 35 61 120 205 349 574 924 1433 ∗25 0 0 1 −1 −4 −11 −16 −42 −61 −115 −178 −303 31 0 0 0 −3 −12 −27 −61 −113 −209 −358 −605 −972 M = 105 cM = 1 ∆min = −4 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 2 3 3 3 4 4 5 6 7 7 2 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −2 −2 −2 −3 −3 −3 −4 −4 −5 −6 4 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 3 4 8 0 0 1 1 0 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 5 11 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 3 2 4 4 13 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 3 5 16 0 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 7 8 8 17 0 −1 0 −1 0 −1 0 −2 0 −1 −1 −2 −1 −3 −1 −3 19 0 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 7 7 9 23 0 0 1 0 1 1 2 1 2 1 3 3 4 3 5 4 32 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 34 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 4 4 6 – 141 – M = 110 cM = 3 ∆min = −9 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −2 −1 −2 −3 −3 −5 −5 −9 −9 −13 −15 −22 −25 −32 −37 3 −1 0 2 1 4 4 6 7 11 14 18 21 28 34 44 7 0 1 1 3 2 3 4 5 6 9 9 13 16 20 21 9 0 2 3 2 5 5 9 10 13 15 22 24 33 39 50 13 0 1 2 4 6 7 10 14 18 23 31 37 49 58 74 17 0 2 3 4 5 8 10 12 17 22 27 34 43 52 65 19 0 1 2 2 2 3 5 5 6 9 10 13 16 19 24 23 0 0 2 1 4 4 6 8 13 13 20 23 31 37 49 ∗29 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 −2 0 −3 −2 −4 −2 −9 −6 ∗39 0 0 0 0 1 −1 −1 −2 −3 −6 −5 −10 −11 −16 −20 M = 114 cM = 4 ∆min = −25 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1 −1 4 9 18 37 62 110 181 291 449 695 1034 1537 2235 5 −1 0 4 3 11 16 32 41 83 113 188 266 413 574 7 0 6 12 30 53 99 166 282 444 706 1067 1622 2387 3498 11 0 3 11 21 42 74 133 216 351 547 849 1271 1897 2757 13 0 3 8 16 37 59 111 178 295 457 718 1062 1606 2327 17 0 2 9 19 38 70 127 205 345 538 840 1267 1904 2778 23 0 0 3 5 15 24 48 75 135 204 333 496 765 1110 29 0 0 −1 −2 −6 −10 −20 −37 −64 −100 −165 −257 −388 −583 35 0 0 0 −3 −7 −18 −32 −67 −111 −194 −310 −501 −767 −1184 – 142 – M = 130 cM = 2 ∆min = −9 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1 −1 0 −1 0 −1 −1 −2 −2 −3 −3 −5 −5 −7 −7 −12 3 −1 −1 −1 −2 −1 −3 −3 −5 −5 −7 −7 −11 −11 −16 −17 7 0 1 2 2 3 3 6 6 8 9 13 14 19 21 27 9 0 1 2 2 4 4 6 8 10 12 16 18 24 28 35 11 0 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 6 8 9 10 14 17 19 17 0 1 1 2 2 3 4 5 5 8 9 12 14 17 19 19 0 1 2 2 4 5 6 8 11 13 17 20 26 31 38 21 0 1 2 3 3 5 6 8 10 13 15 20 23 29 35 27 0 0 1 0 1 1 2 0 3 1 3 3 5 3 7 29 0 0 1 1 2 2 4 4 6 6 10 11 15 16 22 37 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 −1 −2 −2 −2 −4 −4 −6 −7 47 0 0 0 0 0 −1 0 −2 −2 −3 −3 −6 −5 −9 −10 M = 138 cM = 2 ∆min = −49 rmin n 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 −5 5 20 57 141 323 658 1308 2449 4450 7786 13373 5 −2 9 27 56 125 235 451 812 1442 2463 4182 6884 7 −1 13 44 111 265 555 1138 2170 4032 7183 12541 21237 11 0 14 46 115 261 546 1091 2055 3787 6702 11610 19591 13 0 9 29 68 151 308 612 1139 2080 3675 6323 10653 17 0 6 28 68 174 354 753 1419 2678 4775 8407 14255 ∗19 0 2 6 −2 −12 −69 −157 −397 −784 −1581 −2884 −5240 25 0 0 −3 −23 −69 −192 −427 −926 −1817 −3473 −6310 −11189 31 0 0 −1 −11 −33 −100 −220 −491 −973 −1890 −3456 −6203 ∗37 0 0 0 −1 −1 −5 6 8 49 110 263 490 43 0 0 0 0 2 13 47 128 309 677 1369 2653 – 143 – B. Bibliography [1] Sergei Alexandrov, Jan Manschot, and Boris Pioline, D3-instantons, Mock Theta Series and Twistors, (2012), arxiv:1207.1109.
[2] Murad Alim, Babak Haghighat, Michael Hecht, Albrecht Klemm, Marco Rauch, and Thomas Wotschke, Wall-crossing holomorphic anomaly and mock modularity of multiple M5-branes, (2010), arxiv:1012.1608.
[3] O. Alvarez, T. P. Killingback, M. L. Mangano, and P. Windey, String theory and loop space index theorems, Commun. Math. Phys. 111 (1987) 1.
[4] S. K. Ashok and J. Troost, A Twisted Non-compact Elliptic Genus, JHEP 1103 (2011) 067, arxiv:1101.10593.
[5] Shamik Banerjee and Ashoke Sen, Duality orbits, dyon spectrum and gauge theory limit of heterotic string theory on T 6, JHEP 0803 (2008) 022, arxiv:0712.0043.
[6] , S-duality action on discrete T-duality invariants, JHEP 0804 (2008) 012, arxiv:0801.0149.
[7] S. Banerjee, A. Sen, and Y. K. Srivastava, Generalities of quarter BPS dyon partition function and dyons of torsion two, JHEP 0805 (2008) 101, arxiv:0802.0544.
[8] , Partition functions of torsion > 1 dyons in heterotic string theory on T 6, JHEP 0805 (2008) 098, arxiv:0802.1556.
[9] , Genus two surface and quarter BPS dyons: The contour prescription, JHEP 0903 (2009) 151, arxiv:0808.1746.
[10] N. Banerjee, I. Mandal and A. Sen, Black hole hair removal, JHEP 0907 (2009) 091, arxiv:0901.0359.
[11] B. Bates and F. Denef, Exact solutions for supersymmetric stationary black hole composites, JHEP 1111 (2011) 127, hep-th/0304094.
[12] J. C. Breckenridge, Robert C. Myers, A. W. Peet, and C. Vafa, D-branes and spinning black holes, Phys.Lett. B391 (1997) 93–98, hep-th/9602065.
[13] K. Bringmann and K. Ono, Coeﬃcients of harmonic Maass forms, Proceedings of the 2008 University of Florida Conference on Partitions, q-series, and modular forms.
[14] K. Bringmann and O. Richter, Zagier-type dualities and lifting maps for harmonic Maass-Jacobi forms, Adv. Math. 225 no. 4, (2010), 2298–2315.
[15] K. Bringmann and J. Manschot, From sheaves on P 2 to a generalization of the Rademacher expansion, Amer. J. Math. 135 (2013), no. 4, 1039-1065. arXiv:1006.0915.
– 144 – [16] K. Bringmann and K. Mahlburg, An extension of the Hardy-Ramanujan Circle Method and applications to partitions without sequences, American Journal of Math 133 (2011), pages 1151-1178.
[17] K. Bringmann and A. Folsom, Almost harmonic Maass forms and Kac-Wakimoto characters, Journal f¨ ur die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, doi:10.1515/crelle-2012-0102, arXiv:1112.4726.
[18] K. Bringmann, M. Raum, and O. Richter, Harmonic Maass-Jacobi forms with singularities and a theta-like decomposition, to appear in Transactions AMS, arXiv:1207.5600.
[19] K. Bringmann and S. Murthy, On the positivity of black hole degeneracies in string theory, Commun. Number Theory Phys. 7 (2013), no. 1, 15-56. arXiv:1208.3476.
[20] K. Bringmann and A. Folsom, On the asymptotic behavior of Kac-Wakimoto characters, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 141 (2013), pages 1567–1576.
[21] J. H. Bruinier, G. van der Geer, G. Harder and D. Zagier, The 1-2-3 of Modular Forms, Universitext, Springer-Verlag, Belin–Heidelberg (2008).
[22] G. L. Cardoso, J. R. David, B. de Wit, and S. Mahapatra, The mixed black hole partition function for the STU model, JHEP 12 (2008), 086, arxiv:0810.1233.
[23] Alejandra Castro and Sameer Murthy, Corrections to the statistical entropy of ﬁve dimensional black holes, JHEP 0906 (2009), 024, arxiv:0807.0237.
[24] Miranda C.N. Cheng, K3 surfaces, N = 4 Dyons, and the Mathieu group M24, (2010), arxiv:1005.5415.
[25] Miranda C. N. Cheng, John F. R. Duncan and Jeﬀrey A. Harvey, Umbral Moonshine, arXiv:1204.2779.
[26] Miranda C. N. Cheng and Erik Verlinde, Dying dyons don’t count, JHEP 0709 (2007) 070, arxiv:0706.2363.
[27] Young Ju Choie and Subong Lim, The heat operator and mock Jacobi forms, The Ramanujan Journal Volume 22, Number 2 (2010), 209-219.
[28] Atish Dabholkar, Exact counting of black hole microstates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005), 241301, hep-th/0409148.
[29] Atish Dabholkar, Frederik Denef, Gregory W. Moore, and Boris Pioline, Exact and asymptotic degeneracies of small black holes, JHEP 08 (2005), 021, hep-th/0502157.
[30] , Precision counting of small black holes, JHEP 0510 (2005) 096, hep-th/0507014.
– 145 – [31] Atish Dabholkar, Davide Gaiotto, and Suresh Nampuri, Comments on the spectrum of CHL dyons, JHEP 01 (2008), 023, hep-th/0702150.
[32] Atish Dabholkar, Gary W. Gibbons, Jeﬀrey A. Harvey, and Fernando Ruiz Ruiz, Superstrings and solitons, Nucl. Phys. B340 (1990), 33–55.
[33] Atish Dabholkar, Joao Gomes, and Sameer Murthy, Counting all dyons in N = 4 string theory, JHEP 1105 (2011) 059 arxiv:0803.2692.
[34] , Quantum black holes, localization and the topological string, JHEP 1106 (2011) 019 arxiv:1012.0265.
[35] , Localization & Exact Holography, JHEP 1304 (2013) 062 arxiv:1111.1161.
[36] , Nonperturbative black hole entropy and Kloosterman sums, (2014), arxiv:1404.0033.
[37] Atish Dabholkar, Joao Gomes, Sameer Murthy, and Ashoke Sen, Supersymmetric index from black hole entropy, (2010), JHEP 1104 (2011) 034 arxiv:1009.3226.
[38] A. Dabholkar, M. Guica, S. Murthy and S. Nampuri, No entropy enigmas for N = 4 dyons, JHEP 1006 (2010) 007 arxiv:0903.2481.
[39] Atish Dabholkar and Jeﬀrey A. Harvey, Nonrenormalization of the superstring tension, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 63 (1989), 478.
[40] Atish Dabholkar, Renata Kallosh, and Alexander Maloney, A stringy cloak for a classical singularity, JHEP 12 (2004), 059, hep-th/0410076.
[41] Atish Dabholkar and Suresh Nampuri, Spectrum of dyons and black Holes in CHL orbifolds using Borcherds lift, JHEP 11 (2007), 077, hep-th/0603066.
[42] Justin R. David and Ashoke Sen, CHL dyons and statistical entropy function from D1-D5 system, JHEP 11 (2006), 072, hep-th/0605210.
[43] L. J. Dixon, J. A. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten, Strings on Orbifolds, Nucl. Phys. B 261 (1985) 678.
[44] Jan de Boer, Miranda C. N. Cheng, Robbert Dijkgraaf, Jan Manschot, and Erik Verlinde, A Farey tail for attractor black holes, JHEP 11 (2006), 024, hep-th/0608059.
[45] J. de Boer, F. Denef, S. El-Showk, I. Messamah and D. Van den Bleeken, Black hole bound states in AdS3 × S2, JHEP 0811 (2008) 050, arXiv:0802.2257.
[46] F. Denef, Supergravity ﬂows and D-brane stability, JHEP 0008 (2000) 050, hep-th/0005049.
[47] F. Denef, Quantum quivers and Hall/hole halos, JHEP 0210 (2002) 023, hep-th/0206072.
– 146 – [48] Frederik Denef and Gregory W. Moore, Split states, entropy enigmas, holes and halos, (2007), hep-th/0702146.
[49] Robbert Dijkgraaf, Juan Martin Maldacena, Gregory Winthrop Moore, and Erik P. Verlinde, A black hole Farey tail, (2000), hep-th/0005003.
[50] Robbert Dijkgraaf, Gregory W. Moore, Erik P. Verlinde, and Herman L. Verlinde, Elliptic genera of symmetric products and second quantized strings, Commun. Math. Phys. 185 (1997), 197–209, hep-th/9608096.
[51] Robbert Dijkgraaf, Erik P. Verlinde, and Herman L. Verlinde, Counting dyons in N = 4 string theory, Nucl. Phys. B484 (1997), 543–561, hep-th/9607026.
[52] Tohru Eguchi, Hirosi Ooguri, and Yuji Tachikawa, Notes on the K3 surface and the Mathieu group M24, (2010), arxiv:1004.0956.
[53] Tohru Eguchi, Hirosi Ooguri, S-K. Yang and Anne Taormina, Superconformal algebras and string compactiﬁcation on manifolds with SU(N) Holonomy, Nucl. Phys. B315 (1989), 193.
[54] Tohru Eguchi and Yuji Sugawara, SL(2, R)/U(1) supercoset and elliptic genera of noncompact Calabi-Yau manifolds, JHEP 0405 (2004) 014. hep-th/0403193 [55] Tohru Eguchi, Yuji Sugawara and Anne Taormina, Liouville ﬁeld, modular forms and elliptic genera, JHEP 0703 (2007), 119. hep-th/0611338 [56] Tohru Eguchi and Anne Taormina, On the unitary representation of N = 2 and N = 4 superconformal algebras, Phys.Lett. B210 (1988),125.
[57] M. Eichler and D. Zagier, The Theory of Jacobi Forms, Birkh¨ auser, 1985.
[58] Sergio Ferrara, Renata Kallosh, and Andrew Strominger, N = 2 extremal black holes, Phys.
Rev. D52 (1995), 5412–5416, hep-th/9508072.
[59] Davide Gaiotto, Re-recounting dyons in N = 4 string theory, (2005), hep-th/0506249.
[60] Davide Gaiotto, Andrew Strominger, and Xi Yin, New connections between 4D and 5D black holes, JHEP 02 (2006), 024, hep-th/0503217.
[61] , The M5-brane elliptic genus: Modularity and BPS states, JHEP 08 (2007), 070, hep-th/0607010.
[62] Jerome P. Gauntlett, Nakwoo Kim, Jaemo Park, and Piljin Yi, Monopole dynamics and BPS dyons in N = 2 super-Yang-Mills theories, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000), 125012, hep-th/9912082.
[63] Paul H. Ginsparg, Applied conformal ﬁeld theory, (1988), hep-th/9108028.
– 147 – [64] Amit Giveon and David Kutasov, Little string theory in a double scaling limit, JHEP 9910 (1999) 034, hep-th/9909110.
[65] L. Goettsche, The Betti numbers of the Hilbert scheme of points on a smooth protective surface, Math. Ann. 286 (1990), 193.
[66] V. Gritsenko, “Elliptic genus of Calabi-Yau manifolds and Jacobi and Siegel modular forms,” math/9906190 [67] V. A. Gritsenko and V. V. Nikulin, Automorphic forms and Lorentzian Kac–Moody Algebras.
Part I, (1996) alg-geom/9610022.
[68] V. A. Gritsenko and V. V. Nikulin, Automorphic forms and Lorentzian Kac–Moody Algebras.
Part II, (1996) alg-geom/9611028.
[69] V. A. Gritsenko, N.-P. Skoruppa, D. Zagier, Theta blocks I: Elementary theory and examples, in preparation.
[70] Rajesh Kumar Gupta and Sameer Murthy, All solutions of the localization equations for N=2 quantum black hole entropy, JHEP 1302 (2013) 141, arXiv:1208.6221.
[71] Jeﬀrey A. Harvey and Sameer Murthy, Moonshine in Fivebrane Spacetimes, JHEP 1401 (2014) 146, arXiv:1307.7717.
[72] D. R. Hickerson, On the seventh order mock theta functions, Inv. Math. 94, (1988), 661–677.
[73] F. Hirzebruch and D. Zagier, Intersection numbers on curves on Hilbert modular surfaces and modular forms of Nebentypus, Inv. Math. 36 (1976), 57.
[74] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, Unity of superstring dualities, Nucl. Phys. B438 (1995), 109–137, hep-th/9410167.
[75] D. P. Jatkar, A. Sen and Y. K. Srivastava, Black hole hair removal: non-linear analysis, JHEP 1002 (2010) 038, arXiv:0907.0593.
[76] D. Joyce, Y. Song, A Theory of Generalized Donaldson-Thomas Invariants, Memoirs of the AMS 217 (2012), arXiv:0810.5645.
[77] Toshiya Kawai, Yasuhiko Yamada, and Sung-Kil Yang, Elliptic genera and N = 2 superconformal ﬁeld theory, Nucl. Phys. B414 (1994), 191–212, hep-th/9306096.
[78] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, Stability structures, motivic Donaldson-Thomas invariants and cluster transformations, arXiv:0811.2435.
[79] Per Kraus and Finn Larsen, Microscopic black hole entropy in theories with higher derivatives, JHEP 09 (2005), 034, hep-th/0506176.
– 148 – [80] , Partition functions and elliptic genera from supergravity, (2006), hep-th/0607138.
[81] Gabriel Lopes Cardoso, Bernard de Wit, and Thomas Mohaupt, Corrections to macroscopic supersymmetric black-hole entropy, Phys. Lett. B451 (1999), 309–316, hep-th/0412287.
[82] , Area law corrections from state counting and supergravity, Class. Quant. Grav. 17 (2000), 1007–1015, hep-th/9910179.
[83] , Deviations from the area law for supersymmetric black holes, Fortsch. Phys. 48 (2000), 49–64, hep-th/9904005.
[84] , Macroscopic entropy formulae and non-holomorphic corrections for supersymmetric black holes, Nucl. Phys. B567 (2000), 87–110, hep-th/9906094.
[85] Gabriel Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli, and T. Mohaupt, Asymptotic degeneracy of dyonic N = 4 string states and black hole entropy, JHEP 12 (2004), 075.
[86] J. M. Maldacena and A. Strominger, AdS(3) black holes and a stringy exclusion principle, JHEP 9812 (1998) 005 hep-th/9804085.
[87] Juan M. Maldacena, Andrew Strominger, and Edward Witten, Black hole entropy in M-theory, JHEP 12 (1997), 002, hep-th/9711053.
[88] J. Manschot, B. Pioline and A. Sen, Wall Crossing from Boltzmann Black Hole Halos, JHEP 1107 (2011) 059 arXiv:1011.1258.
[89] Jan Manschot and Gregory W. Moore, A Modern Farey Tail, (2007), arxiv:0712.0573.
[90] Jan Manschot, Stability and duality in N=2 supergravity, Commun.Math.Phys., 299, 651-676 (2010), arxiv:0906.1767.
[91] J. A. Minahan, D. Nemeschansky, C. Vafa, and N. P. Warner, E-strings and N = 4 topological Yang-Mills theories, Nucl. Phys. B527 (1998), 581–623, hep-th/9802168.
[92] Ruben Minasian, Gregory W. Moore, and Dimitrios Tsimpis, Calabi-Yau black holes and (0, 4) sigma models, Commun. Math. Phys. 209 (2000), 325–352, hep-th/9904217.
[93] Gregory W. Moore, Les Houches lectures on strings and arithmetic, (2004), hep-th/0401049.
[94] Sameer Murthy, Notes on noncritical superstrings in various dimensions, JHEP 0311 (2003), 056, hep-th/0305197.
[95] Sameer Murthy and Boris Pioline, A Farey tale for N = 4 dyons, JHEP 0909 (2009), 022, arxiv:0904.4253.
[96] Sameer Murthy and Valentin Reys, Quantum black hole entropy and the holomorphic prepotential of N=2 supergravity, JHEP 10 (2013) 099, arXiv:1306.3796.
– 149 – [97] Serge Ochanine, Sur les genres multiplicatifs deﬁnis par des integrales elliptiques, Topology 26 (1987), 143.
[98] Ren´ e Olivetto, On the Fourier coeﬃcients of meromorphic Jacobi forms, arXiv:1210.7926.
[99] H. Ooguri, Superconformal symmetry and geometry of Ricci ﬂat K¨ ahler manifolds, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. A4 (1989), 4303–4324.
[100] C. N. Pope, Axial vector anomalies and the index theorem in charged Schwarzschild and Taub -NUT spaces, Nucl. Phys. B141 (1978), 432.
[101] Ashoke Sen, Dyon-monopole bound states, selfdual harmonic forms on the multi-monopole moduli space, and Sl(2, Z) invariance in string theory, Phys. Lett. B329 (1994), 217–221, hep-th/9402032.
[102] , Strong-weak coupling duality in four-dimensional string theory, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A9 (1994), 3707–3750, hep-th/9402002.
[103] , Extremal black holes and elementary string states, Mod. Phys. Lett. A10 (1995), 2081–2094, hep-th/9504147.
[104] , Black holes and the spectrum of half-BPS states in N = 4 supersymmetric string theory, (2005), hep-th/0504005.
[105] , Walls of marginal stability and dyon spectrum in N = 4 supersymmetric string theories, JHEP 05 (2007), 039, hep-th/0702141.
[106] , Entropy Function and AdS(2)/CFT(1) Correspondence, JHEP 11 (2008), 075, arxiv:0805.0095.
[107] , Quantum Entropy Function from AdS(2)/CFT(1) Correspondence, (2008), arxiv:0809.3304.
[108] , Negative discriminant states in N = 4 supersymmetric string theories, (2011), arxiv:1104.1498.
[109] David Shih, Andrew Strominger, and Xi Yin, Recounting dyons in N = 4 string theory, JHEP 10 (2006), 087, hep-th/0505094.
[110] David Shih and Xi Yin, Exact black hole degeneracies and the topological string, JHEP 04 (2006), 034, hep-th/0508174.
[111] N.-P. Skoruppa, ¨ Uber den Zusammenhang zwischen Jacobi-Formen und Modulformen halbganzen Gewichts, Dissertation, Universit¨ at Bonn (1984).
[112] , Developments in the theory of Jacobi forms. In Automorphic functions and their applications Khabarovsk, 1988, Acad. Sci. USSR Inst. Appl. Math., Khabarovsk 1990, 167–185 – 150 – [113] , Binary quadratic forms and the Fourier coeﬃcients of elliptic and Jacobi modular forms. J. reine Angew. Math. 411 (1990), 66–95 [114] N.-P. Skoruppa, D. Zagier, A trace formula for Jacobi forms J. reine Angew. Math. 393 (1989) 168-198.
[115] , Jacobi forms and a certain space of modular forms. Inventiones mathematicae 94, 113–146 (1988).
[116] Andrew Strominger, Macroscopic entropy of N = 2 extremal black holes, Phys. Lett. B383 (1996), 39–43, hep-th/9602111.
[117] , AdS(2) quantum gravity and string theory, JHEP 01 (1999), 007, hep-th/9809027.
[118] Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa, Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, Phys. Lett. B379 (1996), 99–104, hep-th/9601029.
[119] Jan Troost, The non-compact elliptic genus: mock or modular, JHEP 1006 (2010), 104, arxiv:1004.3649.
[120] Cumrun Vafa and Edward Witten, A strong coupling test of S-duality, Nucl. Phys. B431 (1994), 3–77, hep-th/9408074.
[121] Katrin Wendland, Ph.D. Thesis, Bonn University (2000).
[122] Edward Witten, Dyons of charge eθ/2π, Phys. Lett. B 86 (1979) 283.
[123] , Elliptic genera and quantum ﬁeld theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 109 (1987), 525.
[124] , String theory dynamics in various dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B443 (1995), 85–126, hep-th/9503124.
[125] Edward Witten and David I. Olive, Supersymmetry algebras that include topological charges, Phys. Lett. B78 (1978), 97.
[126] D. Zagier, Nombres de classes et formes modulaires de poids 3/2, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris 281 (1975), 883.
[127] , The Rankin-Selberg method for automorphic functions which are not of rapid decay, J.
Fac. Sci. Tokyo 28 (1982) 415-438.
[128] , Traces of singular moduli, in “Motives, Polylogarithms and Hodge Theory” (eds.
F. Bogomolov, L. Katzarkov), Lecture Series 3, International Press, Somerville (2002), 209–244.
[129] , Ramanujan’s mock theta functions and their applications [d’apr` es Zwegers and Bringmann-Ono], S´ eminaire Bourbaki, 60` eme ann´ ee, 2006-2007, 986 (2007).
– 151 – [130] S. P. Zwegers, Mock theta functions, Thesis, Utrecht (2002), http://igitur-archive.library.uu.nl/dissertations/2003-0127-094324/inhoud.htm.
– 152 –