NIST Team Compares 3 Top Atomic Clocks With Record Accuracy Over Both Fiber and Air | NIST
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
A locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2021/03/nist-team-compares-3-top-atomic-clocks-record-accuracy-over-both-fiber-and
Search NIST
Menu
Close
Publications
What We Do
All Topics
Advanced communications
Artificial intelligence
Bioscience
Buildings and construction
Chemistry
Cybersecurity and Privacy
Electronics
Energy
Environment
Fire
Forensic science
Health
Information technology
Infrastructure
Manufacturing
Materials
Mathematics and statistics
Metrology
Nanotechnology
Neutron research
Performance excellence
Physics
Public safety
Quantum information science
Resilience
Standards
Transportation
Labs & Major Programs
Laboratories
Communications Technology Laboratory
Engineering Laboratory
Information Technology Laboratory
Material Measurement Laboratory
Physical Measurement Laboratory
User Facilities
NIST Center for Neutron Research
CNST NanoFab
Research Test Beds
Research Projects
Tools & Instruments
Major Programs
CHIPS for America Initiative
Congressionally Identified Project Program (CIPP)
Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP)
Manufacturing USA
Office of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology Partnerships Office
Services & Resources
Measurements and Standards
Calibration Services
Laboratory Accreditation (NVLAP)
Quality System
Standard Reference Materials (SRMs)
Standard Reference Instruments (SRIs)
Standards.gov
Time Services
Office of Weights and Measures
Software
Data
Chemistry WebBook
National Vulnerability Database
Physical Reference Data
Standard Reference Data (SRD)
Storefront
License & Patents
Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC)
NIST Research Library
News & Events
News
Events
Blogs
NIST In Focus
Feature Stories
Awards
Video Gallery
Image Gallery
Media Contacts
About NIST
About Us
Leadership
Organization Structure
Budget & Planning
Contact Us
Visit
Careers
Student programs
Work with NIST
History
NIST Digital Archives
NIST Museum
NIST and the Nobel
Educational Resources
NEWS
NIST Team Compares 3 Top Atomic Clocks With Record Accuracy Over Both Fiber and Air
March 24, 2021
Share
Facebook
Linkedin
X.com
Email
NIST researchers precisely compared the signals from three optical atomic clocks over air and optical fiber, with two of the clocks (indicated by Yb and Al+/Mg+) located in different NIST-Boulder laboratories, and a third (Sr) located 1.5 kilometers away at JILA.
Credit:
N. Hanacek/NIST
In a significant advance toward the future redefinition of the international unit of time, the second, a research team led by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has compared three of the world’s leading atomic clocks with record accuracy over both air and optical fiber links.
Described in the March 25 issue of
Nature
,
the NIST-led work is the first to compare three clocks based on different atoms, and the first to link the most advanced atomic clocks in different locations over the air. These atomic clock comparisons place the scientific community one step closer to meeting the guidelines for redefinition of the second.
“These comparisons are really defining the state of the art for both fiber-based and free-space measurements — they are all close to 10 times more accurate than any clock comparisons using different atoms performed so far,” NIST physicist David Hume said.
The new measurements were challenging because the three types of atoms involved “tick” at vastly different frequencies, because all the many network components had to operate with extreme accuracy, and because the wireless link required cutting-edge laser technology and design.
The study compared the
aluminum-ion clock
and
ytterbium lattice clock
, located in different laboratories at NIST Boulder, with the
strontium lattice clock
located 1.5 kilometers away at JILA, a joint institute of NIST and the University of Colorado Boulder. The team’s measurements were so accurate that uncertainties were only 6 to 8 parts in 10
18
— that is, errors never exceeded 0.000000000000000008 — for both fiber and wireless links.
NIST researchers
previously described
in detail how they transferred time signals over the air link between two of the clocks, the NIST ytterbium and JILA strontium clocks, and found the process worked as well as the fiber-based method and 1,000 times more precisely than conventional wireless transfer schemes. This work shows how the best atomic clocks might be synchronized across remote sites on Earth and, as time signals are transferred over longer distances, even between spacecraft.
The key to the air link was the use of
optical frequency combs
, which enable accurate comparisons of widely different frequencies. NIST researchers developed two-way transfer methods to precisely compare optical clocks over the air, even in conditions of atmospheric turbulence and laboratory vibrations. The comb-based signal transfer technique had been
demonstrated previously
, but the latest work was the first to compare state-of-the-art atomic clocks.
Since 1967, the second has been defined based on the cesium atom, which ticks at a microwave frequency. The atomic clocks used in the new comparisons tick at much higher optical frequencies, which divide time into smaller units and thus offer greater precision. Comparisons are crucial to the international community’s selection of one or more atoms as the next time standard.
The new NIST results reported in
Nature
also set other important records. Frequency is the most accurately measured single quantity in science. The NIST team measured frequency ratios, the quantitative relationships between the frequencies of the atoms as measured in three pairs (ytterbium-strontium, ytterbium-aluminum, aluminum-strontium). The results are the three most accurate measurements ever made of natural constants. Frequency ratios are considered constants and are used in some international standards and tests of fundamental physics theories.
Frequency ratios offer an important advantage as a metric for evaluating optical atomic clocks. A direct measurement of an optical clock frequency in the usual units of hertz (one cycle per second) is limited by the accuracy of the current international standard, the cesium microwave clock. Frequency ratios overcome this limitation because they are not expressed in any units.
Frequency ratios are usually measured over long distances by use of fiber networks, which are few and far between, or in some cases with microwave data transferred over satellite links, which tend to be unstable.
Guidelines for redefinition of the second recommend the demonstration and verification of multiple frequency ratio measurements with uncertainties approaching the best optical clock performance. All three types of clocks in the new study offer superlative performance now and promise further improvements. NIST’s ytterbium clocks, for example, represent the natural frequency of the atoms (a value known as systematic uncertainty) to within a possible error of just
1.4 parts in 10
18
— about one billionth of a billionth.
NIST’s new frequency ratio measurements, while record-setting, are not quite that good yet. But the research team is working on improving measurement stability and clock performance, Hume said.
Beyond their role in the next generation of international standards, optical atomic clocks can be used as sensitive probes for new physics, such as the “dark matter” believed to constitute most of the stuff in the universe. Technological applications for optical clocks include improved timing and navigation systems and measuring Earth’s gravitational shape (geodesy).
This work was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Air Force Office for
Scientific Research, the National Science Foundation, the Office of Naval Research, NASA Fundamental Physics, and the
Department of Energy.
Paper: Boulder Area Clock Optical Network (BACON) Collaboration: K. Beloy, M.I. Bodine, T. Bothwell, S.M. Brewer, S.L. Bromley, J.-S. Chen, J.-D. Deschenes, S.A. Diddams, R.J. Fasano, T.M. Fortier, Y.S. Hassan, D.B. Hume, D. Kedar, C.J. Kennedy, I. Khader, A. Koepke, D.R. Leibrandt, H. Leopardi, A.D. Ludlow, W.F. McGrew, W.R. Milner, N.R. Newbury, D. Nicolodi, E. Oelker, T.E. Parker, J.M. Robinson, S. Romisch, S.A. Schaeffer, J.A. Sherman, L.C. Sinclair, L. Sonderhouse, W.C. Swann, J. Yao, J. Ye and X. Zhang. Frequency Ratio Measurements with 18-Digit Accuracy Using an Optical Clock Network.
Nature.
Published March 25, 2021. DOI:
10.1038/s41586-021-03253-4
Physics
,
Atomic / molecular / quantum
and
Time and frequency
Media Contact
301-975-2762
NIST in your inbox
Stay up to date with the latest news from NIST.
Enter Email Address
Organizations
NIST Headquarters
Laboratory Programs
Physical Measurement Laboratory
Time and Frequency Division
Ion Storage Group
Neutral Atom Optical Clocks Group
Quantum Physics Division
Communications Technology Laboratory
Spectrum Technology and Research Division
Fiber Sources and Applications Group
Released March 24, 2021, Updated February 3, 2025
Was this page helpful?
HEADQUARTERS
100 Bureau Drive
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
301-975-2000
Webmaster
|
Contact Us
|
Our Other Offices
X.com
Facebook
LinkedIn
Instagram
YouTube
Giphy
RSS Feed
Mailing List
How are we doing?
Feedback
Site Privacy
Accessibility
Privacy Program
Copyright & Disclaimers
Vulnerability Disclosure
No Fear Act Policy
FOIA
Environmental Policy
Scientific Integrity
Information Quality Standards
Commerce.gov
Science.gov
USA.gov
Vote.gov