[PDF PAGE 1]
Preprint typeset in JHEP style - HYPER VERSION
MIT-CTP-4132, NSF-KITP-10-096, UCSB-Math-2010-19
Global aspects of the space of 6D N = 1 supergravities
Vijay Kumar1,2, David R. Morrison3 and Washington Taylor1
1Center for Theoretical Physics
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
3Departments of Mathematics and Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
vijayk at mit.edu, drm at math.ucsb.edu, wati at mit.edu
Abstract: We perform a global analysis of the space of consistent 6D quantum gravity
theories with N = 1 supersymmetry, including models with multiple tensor multiplets. We
prove that for theories with fewer than T = 9 tensor multiplets, a ﬁnite number of distinct
gauge groups and matter content are possible. We ﬁnd inﬁnite families of ﬁeld combinations
satisfying anomaly cancellation and admitting physical gauge kinetic terms for T > 8. We
ﬁnd an integral lattice associated with each apparently-consistent supergravity theory; this
lattice is determined by the form of the anomaly polynomial. For models which can be
realized in F-theory, this anomaly lattice is related to the intersection form on the base of
the F-theory elliptic ﬁbration. The condition that a supergravity model have an F-theory
realization imposes constraints which can be expressed in terms of this lattice. The analysis
of models which satisfy known low-energy consistency conditions and yet violate F-theory
constraints suggests possible novel constraints on low-energy supergravity theories.
arXiv:1008.1062v1  [hep-th]  5 Aug 2010

[PDF PAGE 2]
Contents
1.
Introduction
1
2.
Anomalies and lattices
3
2.1
Anomaly cancellation
3
2.2
Proof of integrality
5
2.3
Integral lattices and dyonic strings
9
3.
Finite bound for ﬁxed T < 9
10
4.
Inﬁnite families for T ≥9
15
4.1
Example: Inﬁnite families at ﬁxed T ≥9
15
4.2
Example: Inﬁnite families with unbounded numbers of factors
16
5.
Supergravity models in F-theory
17
5.1
Mapping to F-theory
18
5.2
F-theory constraints on low-energy supergravity
20
6.
Examples
25
6.1
Examples with F-theory realizations: SU(N) product models at T = 1
26
6.2
Example: Embedding failure
26
6.3
Example: Outside the Mori cone
27
6.4
Example: New possibilities and constraints for T > 1
28
6.5
Example: Inﬁnite families at T ≥9
30
7.
Global picture of the 6D N = 1 landscape
31
7.1
Extent of the space of 6D supergravities
32
7.2
Charting the space of supergravities with string constructions
34
7.3
Connectivity of the space of 6D supergravities
35
8.
Conclusions
36
1. Introduction
Six-dimensional N = 1 supergravity is a useful domain for studying fundamental questions
about the space of string vacua. On the one hand, the space of such theories is strongly
constrained by gravitational, gauge, and mixed anomalies [1, 2]. On the other hand, 6D
supergravity includes a rich variety of models with diﬀerent gauge groups and matter
– 1 –

[PDF PAGE 3]
representations. Given the diﬃculty of attaining a systematic classiﬁcation of string vacua
in four dimensions, and our limited knowledge at this point regarding constraints on the
space of low-energy 4D ﬁeld theories which can be consistently coupled to quantum gravity,
it is desirable to ﬁnd a context in which we can develop tools and experience for addressing
global questions of this nature. 6D N = 1 supergravity promises to provide a tractable
framework in which we can address questions such as the global extent of the space of
quantum-consistent low-energy theories, and begin to map how diﬀerent string vacuum
constructions ﬁll regions in this space of low-energy theories.
In [3, 4, 5] we began a systematic analysis of the space of low-energy 6D N = 1
supergravity theories. We showed in [4] that for theories with one tensor ﬁeld (those models
which admit a Lagrangian), there are a ﬁnite number of distinct nonabelian gauge groups
and matter representations possible in models which do not suﬀer from clear quantum
inconsistencies from anomaly violation or wrong-sign kinetic terms.
In [5] we gave an
explicit map from the set of such models to topological data for F-theory constructions.
For most apparently-consistent low-energy models this map appears to give good string
vacua through F-theory constructions. In some cases, however, the image of the map was
found to exhibit some pathology; in such cases the models do not correspond to any known
F-theory vacuum.
In this paper, we extend this global analysis to theories with multiple tensor ﬁelds.
The Lagrangian describing gauge groups and matter ﬁelds for 6D N = 1 supergravity
theories with one tensor ﬁeld was originally developed in [6]. Field equations for the (non-
Lagrangian) models with multiple tensor ﬁelds were analyzed by Romans [7]. In a theory
with T antisymmetric 2-form tensor ﬁelds, the associated scalars parameterize a coset space
SO(1, T)/SO(T). We use the underlying SO(1, T) structure to give a fairly simple proof
that for models with T < 9, there are a ﬁnite number of possible nonabelian gauge groups
and matter representations consistent with anomaly cancellation and physical gauge kinetic
terms. We ﬁnd that for any T, each apparently-consistent low-energy supergravity theory
can be associated with an integral lattice Λ.
We use the structure of the lattice Λ to
connect with F-theory, and identify constraints on low-energy theories associated with the
existence of an F-theory vacuum construction. Thus, the results of this paper generalize
and subsume many of the results of [4, 5]; the general structure developed for models with
arbitrary T clariﬁes in some ways the more speciﬁc arguments previously given at T = 1.
In Section 2 we review the structure of anomaly cancellation in general 6D N = 1
supergravity theories, and demonstrate that each anomaly-free theory can be associated
with an integral lattice. In Section 3 we prove that the number of gauge groups and matter
representations for consistent theories is ﬁnite for T < 9. We give explicit examples of
inﬁnite families where the theorem breaks down at T ≥9 in Section 4. In Section 5 we use
the integral lattice for each theory to construct topological data which would be associated
with any corresponding F-theory construction, and describe constraints on the class of
models which can be realized through F-theory. Section 6 contains some examples of F-
theory embeddings of supergravity models, illustrating how geometrical constraints from
– 2 –

[PDF PAGE 4]
F-theory rule out the possibility of F-theory realizations of some apparently-consistent low-
energy models. Section 7 contains some discussion of global aspects of the 6D supergravity
landscape, and Section 8 contains a summary of the conclusions.
Note that the analysis in Sections 2, 3, and 4 depends only upon the structure of
low-energy supergravity and is independent of any structure associated with string theory.
2. Anomalies and lattices
We consider 6D supergravity theories with semi-simple gauge group G = Q
i Gi. The anal-
ysis of abelian factors will appear elsewhere [8]; such abelian factors have little eﬀect on the
structure of the nonabelian part of the theory. We include matter hypermultiplets which
transform in a general representation of G, and T tensor multiplets. For theories with
multiple tensor multiplets, there is a generalized Green-Schwarz mechanism (described by
Sagnotti [9]), which allows for a larger class of gauge anomalies to be cancelled. In this
section we review this mechanism using the notation of [10], and show that the anomaly
cancellation conditions imply the existence of an integral lattice associated with any con-
sistent 6D N = 1 theory.
2.1 Anomaly cancellation
Anomalies can be cancelled by the Green-Schwarz-Sagnotti mechanism if the anomaly
polynomial I8 can be written in the form
I8(R, F) = 1
2ΩαβXα
4 Xβ
4
(2.1)
Here Xα
4 is a 4-form constructed from the curvatures of the Yang-Mills and spin connections
Xα
4 = 1
2aαtrR2 +
X
i
bα
i
 2
λi
trF 2
i

(2.2)
where aα, bα
i are vectors in the space R1,T and Ωαβ is a natural metric (symmetric bilinear
form) on this space.
The tr here refers to the trace in an appropriate “fundamental”
representation of the group Gi, and λi is a normalization factor.
These normalization
factors are ﬁxed by demanding that the smallest topological charge of an embedded SU(2)
instanton is 1, as explained in [11]. These factors are listed in Table 1 for all the simple
groups. I8(R, F) is completely speciﬁed by the multiplets in the low-energy theory and can
be computed using the formulae in [12, 13].
An
Bn
Cn
Dn
E6
E7
E8
F4
G2
λ
1
2
1
2
6
12
60
6
2
Table 1: Normalization factors for the simple groups
– 3 –

[PDF PAGE 5]
When T̸ = 1, one cannot write down a Lorentz covariant Lagrangian. One can con-
struct a partition function, however, along the lines of [14, 15] by coupling the extra
(anti-self-dual) tensor ﬁelds to an auxillary 3-form gauge potential. The anomaly can be
cancelled by a local counterterm of the form
δLGSS = −ΩαβBα ∧Xβ
4
(2.3)
The 2-form ﬁeld Bα has an anomalous gauge transformation, and the above term makes
the tree-level Lagrangian gauge-variant in exactly the right way to cancel the one-loop
anomaly. The gauge invariant 3-form ﬁeld strength is deﬁned as
Hα = dBα + 1
2aαω3L + 2
X
i
1
λi
bα
i ωi
3Y
(2.4)
where ω3L and ωi
3Y are Chern-Simons 3-forms of the spin connection and gauge ﬁeld re-
spectively.
The only (1, 0) supersymmetry multiplets that contain scalars are the hypermultiplets
(4 real scalars) and the tensor multiplet (1 real scalar). The hypermultiplet moduli space
is a quaternionic K¨ahler manifold, analogous to the 4D N = 2 case. The tensor multiplet
scalar moduli space locally takes the form of the coset space SO(1, T)/SO(T) [7], and can
be parameterized by a vector jα in the space R1,T of norm Ωαβjαjβ = +1. From the
viewpoint of the low-energy theory, the above space is just one possible solution to the
requirements imposed by SUSY, although no others are known. In Section 5.2 we will see
that the space SO(1, T)/SO(T) arises naturally as a coset space containing the Teichmuller
space of K¨ahler metrics in F-theory compactiﬁcations as an open set.
The anomaly polynomial does not specify the vectors aα, bβ
i , but only constrains the
SO(1, T) invariant quantities
Ωαβaαaβ,
Ωαβaαbβ
i ,
Ωαβbα
i bβ
j
(2.5)
We will use the notation x·y to denote the SO(1, T) invariant product Ωαβxαyβ. Vanishing
of the trR4 anomaly implies that
H −V = 273 −29T
(2.6)
where H, V, T denote the number of hyper, vector, and tensor multiplets respectively. The
trF 4 contribution to the total anomaly must also cancel for the anomaly to factorize in the
form (2.1). This gives the condition
Bi
adj =
X
R
xi
RBi
R
(2.7)
where the coeﬃcients AR, BR, CR are deﬁned as
trRF 2 = ARtrF 2
(2.8)
trRF 4 = BRtrF 4 + CR(trF 2)2
(2.9)
– 4 –

[PDF PAGE 6]
and xi
R denotes the number of hypermultiplets transforming in representation R under
gauge group factor Gi. We will similarly denote by xij
RS the number of hypermultiplets
transforming in representations R, S under the factors Gi, Gj.
The remaining anomaly factorization conditions relate inner products between the
vectors a, bi to group theory coeﬃcients and the representations of matter ﬁelds
a · a = 9 −T
(2.10)
a · bi = 1
6λi
 
Ai
adj −
X
R
xi
RAi
R
!
(2.11)
bi · bi = −1
3λ2
i
 
Ci
adj −
X
R
xi
RCi
R
!
(2.12)
bi · bj = λiλj
X
RS
xij
RSAi
RAj
S.
(2.13)
We demonstrate in the following section that these inner products are all integers, so that
a, bi can be used to deﬁne an integral lattice.
In the case when T = 1, which was studied in [2, 16, 4], the Green-Schwarz mechanism
requires that the anomaly polynomial factorize as a simple product of polynomials. To
relate this familiar case to the general formalism, we can choose the bilinear form on
SO(1, 1) as
Ωαβ =
 
0 1
1 0
!
(2.14)
For T = 1 we have a2 = 8. The form (2.14) and the anomaly polynomial (2.1) are invariant
under the rescaling
(X1
4, X2
4) →(µ X1
4, µ−1 X2
4)
(2.15)
We can use this scale degree of freedom to set aα ≡(a1, a2) = (−2, −2). We can then
identify bi in this basis with parameters αi, ˜αi through
bi = λi
2 (αi, ˜αi) .
(2.16)
Once this basis is chosen for Ωαβ, a, and bi, the anomaly polynomial takes the familiar,
friendly form used in [5] and most literature on T = 1 models
I8 = X1X2 = (trR2 −
X
i
αitrF 2
i )(trR2 −
X
i
˜αitrF 2
i )
(2.17)
The only symmetry unﬁxed is a Z2 symmetry of the bilinear form that exchanges X1 ↔X2.
2.2 Proof of integrality
The inner products of the vectors aα, bα
i are related to group invariants (AR, CR) and the
number of charged hypermultiplets in various representations. In this section we show that
– 5 –

[PDF PAGE 7]
these inner products are quantized in Z when the normalization factors λi are chosen as in
Table 1. (2.11-2.13) imply that the inner products a · bi, bi · bi, bi · bj are all quantized in
integers if
λi
P
R xi
RAi
R −Ai
adj
6
∈Z
λ2
i
P
R xi
RCi
R −Ci
adj
3
∈Z
(2.18)
λiAi
R ∈Z
We will prove the above statements for each of the simple groups, case by case.
For
the SU(N) (and Sp(N)) series, this is easily proved using properties of Young diagrams,
which are in one-to-one correspondence with the irreducible representations of SU(N) (and
Sp(N)). For an arbitrary group G not of the form SU(N) or Sp(N), we ﬁnd a sequence
of maximal subgroups that terminates in SU(N) or Sp(N), e.g. E8 ⊃SU(9), SO(8) ⊃
SO(7) ⊃SO(6) ∼= SU(4). Then, by computing the branching of representations of G we
can show integrality for G.
We start with SU(N), N ≥4; the coeﬃcients AR, BR, CR can be easily calculated
using two diagonal generators T12, T34 which, in the fundamental representation, take the
form
(T12)ab = δa1δb1 −δa2δb2
(2.19)
(T34)ab = δa3δb3 −δa4δb4
(2.20)
as in the appendix of [4]. The group theory factors AR, BR, CR can be computed in terms
of traces of these generators.
AR = 1
2trRT 2
12
(2.21)
BR + 2CR = 1
2trRT 4
12
(2.22)
CR = 3
4trRT 2
12T 2
34
(2.23)
In the traces above, we sum over all states in the representation R, which can be represented
in terms of the associated Young diagram DR. In (2.23), let |s⟩denote a state in the
representation normalized to ⟨s|s⟩= 1. A basis of such states corresponds to the set of
Young tableaux, given by the Young diagram DR labelled using integers from 1, 2, · · · , N.
Let πij denote the operation that switches the labels i ↔j in a Young tableau. The states
{|s⟩, π12|s⟩, π34|s⟩, π12 ◦π34|s⟩} all give equal contributions to the trace. (Note that these
states need not be distinct, but when they are not all distinct, the contribution vanishes,
since either the number of appearances of 1 and 2 are equal or the number of appearances
of 3 and 4 are equal.)
This makes trRT 2
12T 2
34 a multiple of 4, and therefore CR is an
integer divisible by 3 for every representation of SU(N), N ≥4. This shows that for
SU(N), N ≥4,
1
3
 X
R
xRCR −Cadj
!
∈Z
(2.24)
– 6 –

[PDF PAGE 8]
Anomaly cancellation requires the vanishing of the trF 4 term, which sets P
R xRBR −
Badj = 0. If we deﬁne ER := 1
2trRT 4
12, then (2.22), (2.24) and the F 4 condition together
imply that P
R xRER −Eadj is divisible by 6. From the same kind of argument as above
we know that in a representation R, the states |s⟩, π12|s⟩would together contribute n(s)2
to AR and n(s)4 to ER, with n(s) := ⟨s|T12|s⟩∈Z. Since n(s)2 ≡n(s)4 (mod 6), we have
ER ≡AR (mod 6). Therefore,
1
6
 X
R
xRAR −Aadj
!
∈Z .
(2.25)
Since the normalization factor for SU(N) in Table 1 is 1, this shows that for an SU(N ≥4)
factor in the gauge group all the conditions in (2.18) are satisﬁed.
For the other subgroups of GL(N), we can again use the Young diagram approach
(see [17] for details on Young diagrams for the other classical groups). The irreducible
representations of Sp(N) are in one-to-one correspondence with Young diagrams with all
possible contractions with the ϵ symbol subtracted. If we choose appropriate generators
from the Cartan subalgebra of Sp(N) as in [4], whose squares are exactly equal to the
squares of the SU(N) generators we chose above, the above proof for SU(N) carries through
unchanged. In the case of SO(N), the set of Young diagrams only gives the representations
with integer weight; these exclude the spinor representations. With the right choice of
generators, the above proof shows that for the integer weight representations, we have
integral inner products. If we include spinor representations, the inner products are actually
quantized in 1
2Z.
Including the factor of 2 in the normalization of SO(N) in Table 1,
however, we ﬁnd that the inner products are again integral. An alternate proof of integrality
for the SO(N) representations involves using a sequence of maximal subgroups. We will
discuss this method in general below, and then apply it to the SO(N) case and also to the
exceptional groups.
Consider a general simple group G. We wish to show that whenever P
R xRBR−Badj =
0, the conditions (2.18) are satisﬁed. Let H be a simple, maximal (proper) subgroup of the
simple Lie group G. For a given representation R of G, we can compute the decomposition
of R into irreducible representations Si of the maximal subgroup H ⊂G: R = ⊕in(R)iSi
where n(R)i denotes the multiplicity of representation Si.
trRF 2
G =
X
i
n(R)itrSiF 2
H =
 X
i
n(R)iASi(H)
!
trF 2
H
(2.26)
trRF 4
G =
X
i
n(R)itrSiF 4
H =
 X
i
n(R)iBSi(H)
!
trF 4
H +
 X
i
n(R)iCSi(H)
!
(trF 2
H)2
(2.27)
Here tr denotes the trace in the fundamental representation of H. This gives us a way of
computing AR(G) for an arbitrary group G using its maximal subgroup [13].
AR(G) = trRF 2
G
trfF 2
G
=
P
i n(R)iASi(H)
P
i n(f)iASi(H) .
(2.28)
– 7 –

[PDF PAGE 9]
Here, for clarity, trf explicitly denotes the trace in the (suitably normalized) fundamental
representation f of G with f = ⊕in(f)iSi under H ⊂G.
Anomaly cancellation for G implies that P
R xRBR(G) −Badj(G) = 0. Then,
X
R
xRtrRF 4
G −tradjF 4
G =
 X
R
xRCR(G) −Cadj(G)
!
(trfF 2
G)2
⇒
X
R
xRCR(G) −Cadj(G) =
P
R xR
P
i n(R)iCSi(H) −P
i n(adj)iCSi(H)
(P
i n(f)iASi(H))2
.
(2.29)
If we have integrality for the group H, i.e. for every {yS ∈Z} satisfying
X
S
ySBS(H) = 0 ⇒
(
λH
P
S ySAS(H) ∈6Z
λ2
H
P
S ySCS(H) ∈3Z
(2.30)
then, using ySi = P
R xR n(R)i −n(adj)i we have
λH
 X
i
n(f)iASi(H)
! P
R xRAR(G) −Aadj(G)
6
∈Z
(2.31)
λ2
H
 X
i
n(f)iASi(H)
!2 P
R xRCR(G) −Cadj(G)
3
∈Z
(2.32)
The conditions (2.18) are then all satisﬁed for a group G, if we prove that
λG = λH
X
i
n(f)iASi(H)
(2.33)
for a maximal subgroup H.
We ﬁrst consider the particular case of G = E8 and the maximal subgroup SU(9) ⊂E8
[13]. The coeﬃcients AR, BR, CR for E8 are deﬁned using the adjoint representation as the
fundamental.
E8 ⊃SU(9)
248 = 84 ⊕84 ⊕adj
(2.34)
Using A84(SU(9)) = 21, Aadj(SU(9)) = 18, we have integrality for E8, because λE8 = 60
and λSU(9) = 1, and therefore relation (2.33) is satisﬁed
λE8 = λSU(9)(2A84 + Aadj) = 60 .
(2.35)
In fact, the branching rule in (2.34) makes clear the origin of the normalization factors.
Since
tradjF 2
E8 = 2 tr84F 2
SU(9) + tradjF 2
SU(9) = 60 tr9F 2
SU(9),
(2.36)
including a normalization factor of 1/60 for the E8 group trace, relative to the SU(9) trace,
ensures that the minimum instanton number of any conﬁguration of E8 gauge ﬁelds is 1.
– 8 –

[PDF PAGE 10]
For the SO(N) series, we can show that (2.33) is satisﬁed by induction. For N = 6,
SO(6) ∼= SU(4) we have
tr6F 2
SO(6) = tr6F 2
SU(4) = 2 trF 2
SU(4)
(2.37)
Equation (2.33) is again satisﬁed since λSO(6) = 2, λSU(4) = 1. For the inductive step, since
SO(N −1) is a maximal subgroup of SO(N),
trNF 2
SO(N) = trN−1F 2
SO(N−1)
(2.38)
Thus, integrality for SO(N −1) implies integrality for SO(N), and the inductive step is
proved.
Similarly, we can prove integrality for the groups E6, E7, F4 using the maximal sub-
groups Sp(4), SU(8), SO(9) respectively.
In each case we ﬁnd that relation (2.33) is
satisﬁed. We have thus shown that the inner products a · bi, bi · bi, bi · bj are all integral if
all simple factors in the gauge group are drawn from the list
{SU(N ≥4), SO(N ≥7), Sp(N ≥2), E6,7,8, F4}
(2.39)
and suitable scaling factors are applied to the anomaly coeﬃcients. The groups SU(2), SU(3)
and G2 are conspicuously absent from this list. The normalization factors for these groups
are 1, 1 and 2 respectively, but in these cases, the condition that local anomalies are absent
does not constrain the inner products to be integral. There is a more subtle anomaly,
however, ﬁrst discussed in [18], where the partition function is invariant under local gauge
transformations (gauge current is conserved quantum mechanically), but not invariant
under “large” gauge transformations. The analysis of such “global anomalies” in six di-
mensions was carried out in [19], and more thoroughly in [20]. Using their results, we ﬁnd
that the inner products in question are non-integral for SU(2), SU(3) and G2 precisely
when the low-energy theory is plagued by a global anomaly, which renders these theories
inconsistent.
Therefore, imposing that the low-energy theory is free of local and global anomalies,
we have shown that the anomaly coeﬃcients deﬁne an integral lattice Λ. This lattice Λ
will play a crucial role in deﬁning possible embeddings into F-theory.
2.3 Integral lattices and dyonic strings
Since the inner products a·a, a·bi, bi·bj compatible with the anomaly cancellation equations
are all integral, we can use this inner product structure to form an integral lattice
Λ =






a2
−a · b1 −a · b2 · · ·
−a · b1
b2
1
b1 · b2 · · ·
−a · b2 b1 · b2
b2
2
· · ·
...
...
...
...






(2.40)
– 9 –

[PDF PAGE 11]
Note that this lattice may be degenerate; in some cases there can be linear relations between
the vectors a, bi.
We choose to deﬁne the lattice in terms of −a rather than a since
generally −a is a positive vector in the sense that −a·j > 0 for those models with F-theory
descriptions, as we discuss in Section 5.
For models which have a consistent quantum UV completion, there is a natural inter-
pretation of the lattice Λ in terms of the charge lattice of BPS states. The BPS states of
the 6D N = (1, 0) SUSY algebra are extended string-like states, known as dyonic strings,
with arbitrary charges under the (1, T) multiplet of two-form ﬁelds Bα [21]. For theories
with nonabelian gauge ﬁelds, there are BPS states known as gauge dyonic strings, where
the gauge ﬁeld has an instanton proﬁle in the directions transverse to the string [22]. For
every nonabelian factor Gi in the gauge group, there is a corresponding gauge dyonic string
with conserved 2-form charge given by the vector bi. (The dyonic string is obtained from
the gauge dyonic string by taking the instanton size →0 limit.). In a consistent quan-
tum theory, just as the product of electric and magnetic monopole charges is quantized in
standard 4D electromagnetic theory due to the single-valued nature of the electron wave
function, the inner product b·b′ of dyonic string charges is quantized in the 6D theory [23].
Thus, we expect that in a consistent quantum theory, if there are quantum excitations
associated with the solitonic dyonic strings, these states must live in an integral lattice ˜Λ
of signature (1, T) of which Λ is a sublattice. It is interesting and perhaps suggestive that
the integrality of the lattice Λ follows directly from the anomaly cancellation conditions,
with no further assumptions about the quantum consistency of the theory or the existence
of quantum string states.
3. Finite bound for ﬁxed T < 9
In this section we prove that for ﬁxed T < 9 there are a ﬁnite number of distinct possible
combinations of nonabelian gauge group and matter representations. This analysis is purely
based on aspects of the low-energy supergravity theory, and is independent of string theory
or any other speciﬁc UV completion.
The ﬁnite range of possible gauge groups and matter representations for T = 1 was
proven in [4]. We give a similar proof here for any ﬁxed T between 0 and 8, using the
SO(1, T) invariant inner product structure on the vectors a, bi, j.
As in [4], we ignore
abelian factors; such factors do not aﬀect the anomaly cancellation conditions (2.7-2.13)
on the nonabelian gauge group factors. The constraint on inﬁnite families breaks down
at T = 9 due to the change of sign of a2 = 9 −T. When a has positive norm, it places
stronger constraints on the range of allowed models. We give explicit examples of inﬁnite
families of anomaly-free models with acceptable gauge kinetic terms at T = 9 and greater
in Section 4.
The proof for T < 9 proceeds by contradiction. We assume that there is an inﬁnite
family of models {M(γ)} = {M(1), M(2), . . .} with nonabelian gauge groups {G(γ)}. There
are a ﬁnite number of (semi-simple) groups G with dimension below any ﬁxed bound. For
– 10 –

[PDF PAGE 12]
each ﬁxed G, there are a ﬁnite number of representations whose dimension is below the
bound (2.6) on the number of hypermultiplets. Thus, as argued in [4], any inﬁnite family
{G(γ)} must include gauge groups of arbitrarily large dimension. For any given model in the
family we decompose the semi-simple gauge group into a product of simple group factors
G(γ) = G(γ)
1
× G(γ)
2
× · · · × G(γ)
k(γ). We divide the possibilities into two cases as in [4].
1. The dimension of the simple factors in the groups G(γ) is bounded across all γ, that is
dim(G(γ)
i
) ≤D for all 1 ≤i ≤k(γ) for every theory M(γ). In this case, the number
of simple factors is unbounded over the family.
2. The dimension of at least one simple factor in G(γ) is unbounded. For example, the
gauge group is of the form G(γ) = SU(N(γ)) × ˜G(γ), where N(γ) →∞.
Case 1: In this case we can rule out inﬁnite families for arbitrary but ﬁxed T. In case
1 there are an unbounded number of simple factors, but the dimension of each factor G(γ)
i
is bounded by dim G(γ)
i
≤D. Assume that we have an inﬁnite sequence of models whose
gauge groups have N(γ) factors, with N(γ) unbounded. To simplify notation, we drop the
subscript γ which indexes theories in the family {M(γ)}. We consider one model M in
this inﬁnite sequence, with N factors. We divide the factors Gi into 3 classes:
1. Type Z: b2
i = 0
2. Type N: b2
i < 0
3. Type P: b2
i > 0
We begin by recapitulating some simple arguments from [4]. Since the dimension of
each factor is bounded, the contribution to H −V from −V is bounded below by −ND.
For ﬁxed T the total number of hypermultiplets is then bounded by
H ≤273 −29T + ND ≡B ∼O(N) .
(3.1)
This means that the dimension of any given representation is bounded by the same value
B.
The number of gauge group factors λ under which any matter ﬁeld can transform
nontrivially is then bounded by 2λ ≤B, so λ ≤O(ln N).
Now, consider the diﬀerent types of factors. Denote the number of type N, Z, P factors
by NN,Z,P , where
N = NN + NZ + NP .
(3.2)
We can write the bi’s in a (not necessarily integral) basis where Ω= diag(+1, −1, −1, . . .)
as
bi = (xi,⃗yi) .
(3.3)
For any type P factor, |xi| > |⃗yi|, so bi · bj > 0 for any pair of type P factors. Thus, there
are hypermultiplets charged under both gauge groups for every pair of type P factors. A
– 11 –

[PDF PAGE 13]
hypermultiplet charged under λ ≥2 gauge group factors appears in λ(λ −1) (ordered)
pairs, and contributes at least 2λ to the total number of hypermultiplets H. Each ordered
pair under which this hypermultiplet is charged then contributes at least
2λ
λ(λ −1) ≥1
(3.4)
to the total number of hypermultiplets H. It follows that the NP (NP −1) type P pairs,
under which at least one hypermultiplet is charged, contribute at least NP (NP −1) to H,
so
NP (NP −1) ≤B
(3.5)
Thus,
NP ≤
√
B + 1 ∼O(
√
N)
(3.6)
which is much smaller than N for large N. So most of the b′
is associated with gauge group
factors in any inﬁnite family must be type Z or type N.
Now consider type N factors. Any set of r mutually orthogonal type N vectors deﬁnes
an r-dimensional negative-deﬁnite subspace of R1,T . This means, in particular, that we
cannot have T + 1 mutually orthogonal type N vectors. If we have NN type N vectors,
we can deﬁne a graph whose nodes are the type N vectors, where an edge connects every
two nodes associated with perpendicular vectors.
Tur´an’s theorem [24] states that the
maximum number of edges on any graph with n vertices which does not contain a subset
of T + 1 completely connected vertices is
(1 −1/T)n2/2
(3.7)
where the total number of possible edges is n(n−1)/2. Thus, applying this theorem to the
graph described above on nodes associated with type N vectors, the number of ordered
pairs with charged hypermultiplets must be at least
N2
N
T
−NN .
(3.8)
It then follows that
NN ≤
√
TB + T ∼O(
√
N) .
(3.9)
Finally, consider type Z factors. Vectors bi, bj of the form (3.3) associated with two
type Z factors each have |xi| = |⃗yi| and have a positive inner product unless they are
parallel, in which case bi · bj = 0. Denote by µ the size of the largest collection of parallel
type Z vectors. Each type Z vector is perpendicular to fewer than µ other type Z vectors,
so there are at least NZ(NZ −µ) pairs of type Z factors under which there are charged
hypers. We must then have
NZ(NZ −µ) = (NZ −µ)(N −NP −NN) ≤B .
(3.10)
But from (3.6, 3.9) this means that NZ −µ is of order at most O(1) (and is bounded by D
as N →∞), while NZ is of order O(N). Thus, all but a fraction of order 1/N of the type
– 12 –

[PDF PAGE 14]
Group
Matter content
H −V
a · b
b2
SU(N)
2N
N2 + 1
0
-2
(N + 8)
+ 1
1
2N2 + 15
2 N + 1
1
-1
(N −8)
+ 1
1
2N2 −15
2 N + 1
-1
-1
16
+ 2
15N + 1
2
0
SO(N)
(N −8)
1
2N2 −7
2N
-1
-1
Sp(N/2)
(N + 8)
1
2N2 + 7
2N
1
-1
16
+ 1
15N −1
2
0
Table 2: Allowed charged matter for an inﬁnite family of models with gauge group H(N). The
last two columns give the values of a · b, b2 in the factorized anomaly polynomial.
Z factors have vectors in a common parallel direction. In [4], we showed that all group +
matter conﬁgurations which give type Z factors have a positive value for H −V . The total
contribution to H −V is then bounded by
H −V > µ −[(NZ −µ) + NP + NN] (D) ∼O(N)
(3.11)
which exceeds the bound H −V ≤273 −29T for suﬃciently large N. Thus, we have ruled
out case 1 by contradiction for all T > 0.
Case 2:
In [4] we proved that there are no inﬁnite families with factors of unbounded size for
T = 1. A very similar proof works up to T = 8; we outline this proof using the inner
product structure and vectors a, bi, j, making use of results from [4]. As discussed in [4],
for SU(N) the F 4 anomaly cancellation condition
BAdj = 2N =
X
R
xRBR
(3.12)
can only be satisﬁed at large N when the number of multiplets xR vanishes in all represen-
tations other than the fundamental, adjoint, and two-index antisymmetric and symmetric
representations. For these representations, indexed in that order, (3.12) becomes
2N = x1 + 2Nx2 + (N −8)x3 + (N + 8)x4 .
(3.13)
Note that we do not distinguish here between representations and their conjugates, which
give equal anomaly contributions.
The solutions to (3.13) at large N, along with the
corresponding solutions for the other classical groups SO(N), Sp(N) are listed in Table 2.
We discard solutions (x1, x2, x3, x4) = (0, 1, 0, 0) and (0, 0, 1, 1), where a · bi = b2
i = 0 since
for T < 9 these relations combined with a2 > 0 imply that bi = 0 and therefore that the
kinetic term for the gauge ﬁeld is identically zero. The contribution to H −V from each
of the group and matter combinations in Table 2 diverges as N →∞. This cannot be
cancelled by contributions to −V from an inﬁnite number of factors, for the same reasons
which rule out case 1. Thus, any inﬁnite family must have an inﬁnite sub-family, with
– 13 –

[PDF PAGE 15]
gauge group of the form ˆH(M) × H(N) × ˜GM,N, with both M, N →∞. For any factors
Gi, Gj with a · bi, a · bj̸ = 0, in a (non-integral) basis where Ω= diag(+1, −1, −1, . . .), and
a = (
√
a2, 0, 0, . . .) writing
bi = (xi,⃗yi)
(3.14)
with xi = a · bi/
√
a2 we have
xixj = (a · bi)(a · bj)/a2 ≥bi · bj =
X
R,S
xRSARAS .
(3.15)
Since xixj can be taken to be constant for the inﬁnite family of pairs ˆH(M), H(N), while
AR grows for all representations besides the fundamental, the only possible ﬁelds charged
under more than one of the inﬁnite factors in Table 2 are bifundamentals.
We now consider all possible inﬁnite families built from products of groups and rep-
resentations in Table 2 with bounded H −V . There are 5 such combinations with two
factors. These combinations were enumerated in [4], and are listed in Table 4 in that paper.
These combinations include two inﬁnite families shown to satisfy anomaly factorization by
Schwarz [25], as well as three other similar families. In [4] it was shown that for T = 1 the
models in all ﬁve of these inﬁnite families are unacceptable because the gauge kinetic term
for the two factors are opposite in sign and therefore one is always unphysical. The same
consequence follows as long as T < 9, where a2 > 0. This can be shown as follows: For
each two-factor inﬁnite family we have two vectors b1, b2 which satisfy a · (b1 + b2) = 0 and
(b1+b2)2 = 0. But these conditions imply b1+b2 = 0, so that j ·b1 and j ·b2 cannot both be
positive. For example, for the theory found by Schwarz with gauge group SU(N)×SU(N)
with two bifundamental ﬁelds, we have a · b1 = a · b2 = 0, b2
1 = b2
2 = −2, b1 · b2 = 2,
from which it follows that b1 = −b2. This proof breaks down when a2 ≤0, since then
a · b = b2 = 0 is not suﬃcient to prove b = 0. In the following section we give an inﬁnite
family of examples which has no clear inconsistency at T = 9.
Note that while for T = 1 there are no inﬁnite families with more than two large gauge
factors, at larger T there are families with three large gauge factors. For example, there is
an inﬁnite family of models with
G = SU(N −8) × SU(N) × SU(N + 8)
(3.16)
with bifundamental matter in the (N −8, N, 1) and (1, N, N + 8) representations. (This
model cannot occur at T = 1 since then it is not possible to have b1 · b3 = 0 when
a · bi = 0, b2
i = −2). For this model, and for the similar models with the ﬁrst and/or last
factor replaced with Sp(N/2 −4) and/or SO(N + 8), a similar argument to that used to
rule out the two-factor inﬁnite families shows that b1 + b2 + b3 = 0 when T < 9 so that we
cannot have j · bi > 0 for all three gauge group factors.
This proves case 2 of the analysis. So we have proven that for T < 9 there are a ﬁnite
number of distinct gauge groups and matter content which satisfy anomaly cancellation
with physical kinetic terms for all gauge ﬁeld factors. We have ruled out inﬁnite families
– 14 –

[PDF PAGE 16]
with unbounded numbers of gauge group factors at any ﬁnite T, though we show that such
inﬁnite families exist when T is unbounded in Section 4. We have not ruled out inﬁnite
families with a ﬁnite number of gauge group factors which become unbounded at ﬁnite
T > 8. Indeed, we give an explicit construction of such a family in Section 4.
A systematic enumeration of the ﬁnite set of possible gauge groups and matter content
compatible with a ﬁxed T < 9 is in principle possible. One approach to the enumeration
is to break the gauge group into blocks associated with simple factors and their associated
matter content, and then to combine blocks in such a way that the gravitational anomaly
H −V is not exceeded. This approach was discussed and applied for some classes of models
in [5]. With more tensor ﬁelds, the limit H −V = 273 −29T more strictly constrains
the range of possible matter representations, although the increased dimensionality of the
space R1,T allows blocks to be combined more freely. One could proceed with a systematic
enumeration by sequentially classifying all models with matter transforming under at most
λ distinct gauge group factors for increasing values of λ. It is easy to see that for any given
gauge group there are a ﬁnite number of matter representations such that H/λ −V <
273 −29T. This bound is a useful guide in constructing all allowed models, though care
must be taken since for any ﬁxed T there can be a ﬁnite number of type N blocks which
contribute negatively to H −V . We leave a complete and systematic enumeration of the
ﬁnite set of possible T < 9 models for future work.
4. Inﬁnite families for T ≥9
In this section we give some examples of inﬁnite families of models which satisfy anomaly
cancellation and admit correct-sign kinetic terms, when T ≥9.
4.1 Example: Inﬁnite families at ﬁxed T ≥9
From the way in which the ﬁniteness proof breaks down at T = 9, it is fairly straightforward
to construct an inﬁnite class of apparently-consistent supergravity models at T = 9. We
consider again the inﬁnite class of models found by Schwarz with gauge group G = SU(N)×
SU(N) and two bifundamental matter ﬁelds, but now with T > 8. For this gauge group
and matter representation, at T = 9 we need vectors −a, b1, b2 with inner product matrix
Λ =



0 0
0
0 −2 2
0 2 −2


.
(4.1)
In a basis with Ω= diag(+1, −1, −1, . . .), this can be realized through the vectors
−a = (3, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1)
b1 = (1, −1, −1, −1,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0,
0)
b2 = (2,
0,
0,
0, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1, −1)
(4.2)
– 15 –

[PDF PAGE 17]
This choice of vectors satisﬁes the correct gauge kinetic term sign conditions j · bi > 0 for
j = (1, 0, 0, . . .). It is straightforward to construct similar examples for T > 9 by simply
adding additional 1’s in additional columns for a.
We will show in Section 6 that at T = 9 these models are incompatible with F-theory
for large enough values of N and thus do not have any known string realization.
4.2 Example: Inﬁnite families with unbounded numbers of factors
Although we proved that for any ﬁxed T there are no inﬁnite families with unbounded
numbers of factors (case 1), this restriction does not hold when T itself is unbounded. From
the gravitational anomaly condition (2.6) it would seem that a family with increasing T
is diﬃcult to construct, as the upper bound on H −V becomes increasingly negative. By
choosing gauge factors with minimal matter, however, we can ﬁnd anomaly-free models
with arbitrarily many gauge group factors. This is not possible for most types of gauge
group factors. For example, for factors of the form SU(N), as noted in [5], for any number
of antisymmetric tensor representations the F 4 condition ﬁxes the number of fundamental
representations so that H/2 −V is positive. Thus, for factors of this form we cannot build
combinations with arbitrarily negative total H −V with matter transforming under at
most two gauge group factors.
To minimize the total H −V we can consider gauge group factors such as SO(8)
and E8, for which no charged matter is needed to satisfy the anomaly equations. For a
pure SO(8) factor, we have V = 28. Since each such factor is associated with a type N
vector with b2
i = −4, we need an additional tensor in T to accommodate a type N vector
perpendicular to the b vectors from all other factors for each SO(8) factor. Adding one
SO(8) factor and one tensor to a model contributes a total of
∆(H −V + 29T) = 1
(4.3)
to the total gravitational anomaly, so the number of such factors which can be added is
large but bounded.
The same is not true for E8 factors. Each such factor has V = 248. Considering
only the constraints from anomaly cancellation and gauge kinetic term sign conditions, we
can construct a family of models with gauge group G = Ek
8 and no charged matter. The
associated vectors {−a, bi} satisfy −a·bi = −10, b2
i = −12, bi ·bj = 0, i̸ = j. For suﬃciently
large T such vectors can be found. For example, when T = 9 + 8k, a representation with
the inner product Ω= diag(+1, −1, −1, . . .) is given by
−a = (
3, −1, (−1)4
, (−1)4
, −1,
−1, −1, −1, · · · )
b1 = ( −1, −1, (−1)3, −3,
(0)4
,
0,
0,
0,
0, · · · )
b2 = ( −1, −1,
04
, (−1)3, −3,
0,
0,
0,
0, · · · )
...
bk = ( −1, −1,
04
,
· · ·
, 04, (−1)3, −3,
0, · · · )
(4.4)
– 16 –

[PDF PAGE 18]
The notation xn indicates that the entry x repeats n times. Note that the last 4k + 8
entries of all the vectors b1, b2, · · · , bk are all zero. This represents an inﬁnite family of
models satisfying anomaly cancellation. There exists a choice of j such that gauge kinetic
terms for all factors have the correct sign,
j = (−|j0|, 0, 0, · · · , 0, 1, 1, · · · , 1),
|j0| >
√
4k + 8 ,
(4.5)
where the last 4k + 8 entries in j are 1. By choosing (4k + 8)/3 > |j0|, we can also arrange
for −a · j > 0. As we show in Section 6, this class of models is nevertheless not compatible
with F-theory and has no known string realization for large enough k.
5. Supergravity models in F-theory
Based only on the structure of the low-energy supergravity theory, we have now shown
that there are a ﬁnite number of possible gauge groups and matter representations for
models with T < 9. Every consistent supergravity model, furthermore, is characterized by
an integral lattice Λ. The next question we would like to address is which of these mod-
els can be realized in string theory. By determining the subset of apparently-consistent
low-energy theories which can be realized through each of the known approaches to string
compactiﬁcation, we can hope to chart the full space of 6D supergravity theories. Identify-
ing characteristic features of models which cannot be realized through any existing string
construction may lead to the identiﬁcation of new string vacua, or new constraints on the
low-energy theories.
We focus here on identifying F-theory constructions of low-energy supergravity models.
In subsection 5.1 we show that the structure of anomaly-free N = 1 6D supergravity
theories is closely related to that of F-theory compactiﬁcations, allowing us to map the
discrete data of the 6D supergravity theory to topological data for an F-theory construction.
This generalizes the analysis of [5], in which the map from low-energy supergravity to F-
theory topological data was described for models with T = 1.
In subsection 5.2 we examine some of the constraints on low-energy theories which
must be satisﬁed for an F-theory realization to exist. While, as discussed in [5], a large
fraction of the apparently-consistent supergravity models at T = 1 seem consistent with F-
theory, the constraints imposed by F-theory limit the range of possible models substantially
as T increases. For T > 8, F-theory reduces the inﬁnite number of apparently-consistent
models to a ﬁnite number. We do not attempt to give a complete and deﬁnitive analysis
of the constraints from F-theory on low-energy theories here, but we identify a number of
general constraints on the structure of the low-energy theory imposed by F-theory. We
give some speciﬁc examples of these F-theory constraints on apparently-consistent models
with various values of T in Section 6.
– 17 –

[PDF PAGE 19]
5.1 Mapping to F-theory
F-theory∗[27, 28] is a limit of string theory which generalizes type IIB string theory by
allowing the axiodilaton τ to vary over a d-dimensional compactiﬁcation space B. This can
be thought of as describing an auxiliary 2-torus whose complex structure depends upon
the axiodilaton, giving an elliptic ﬁbration over B. The elliptic ﬁber degenerates at com-
plex codimension one loci in the base B, which correspond to 7-branes. Speciﬁc types of
singularities of the elliptic ﬁbration structure on divisors ξi in the base give rise to cor-
responding nonabelian gauge group factors Gi in the resulting low-energy gravity theory.
When B is a (complex) 2-dimensional space, the F-theory construction is characterized by
an elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau 3-fold with section. As shown in [27, 28], F-theory can be
used to describe nonperturbative string vacua which are inaccessible by direct supergravity
compactiﬁcation, including 6D models with multiple tensor ﬁelds. F-theory is the most
general approach developed so far to construct compactiﬁcations of string theory to six
dimensions. There are heterotic compactiﬁcations on K3 with certain kinds of bifunda-
mental matter ﬁelds, however, which are not described in the standard F-theory approach.
We discuss this further in Section 7; we are not aware of any other string constructions of
N = 1 6D supergravity models which do not also have F-theory descriptions.
In low-energy theories that arise from F-theory compactiﬁcations, various aspects of
the low-energy physics including the gauge group and matter content are controlled by the
geometry of the elliptic 3-fold. Much of the work on F-theory has focused on understanding
the consequences for the low-energy theory of speciﬁc geometric structures in the Calabi-
Yau compactiﬁcation space.
We would like to turn this around and ask — Given the
low-energy theory, what are the necessary conditions for the existence of a UV-completion
in the form of an F-theory compactiﬁcation?
The structure of the integral lattice Λ determined by the vectors a, bi is closely related
to the cohomology lattice of a two-dimensional F-theory base B. For example, the anomaly
conditions (2.13) relate the inner product bi · bj to the number of hypermultiplets simulta-
neously charged under Gi ×Gj. In F-theory, the number of such hypermultiplets is related
to the intersection product of divisors ξi in the base B associated with the nonabelian
gauge group factors Gi. Analysis of anomaly cancellation in F-theory constructions shows
that these inner products can be identiﬁed [10, 29, 30]
bi · bj = ξi · ξj .
(5.1)
In fact, as discussed in [5], we can associate the SO(1, T) vector bi for each factor Gi
with a corresponding divisor ξi in the base B.
This furthermore leads us to interpret
the bilinear form Ωαβ as the intersection product in H2(B, Z). The vector a with norm
a · a = 9 −T is naturally identiﬁed with the canonical divisor of the base KB, which
also satisﬁes KB · KB = 9 −T. The inner products between a and bi also agree with the
corresponding inner products in F-theory, −a · bi = −KB · ξi [10, 29, 30]. The requirement
∗See [26] for a good general review and introduction to F-theory.
– 18 –

[PDF PAGE 20]
of physical gauge kinetic terms requires that there exist an SO(1, T) vector j satisfying
j · j = 1 with j · bi > 0 for all i. This vector corresponds in F-theory to the K¨ahler form J
on the base B, and the condition J · ξi > 0 is the requirement that the curves wrapped by
7-branes have positive volume. This successfully identiﬁes all the parameters of the low-
energy theory, up to the two-derivative level†, with geometric quantities in the F-theory
compactiﬁcation. To summarize, for any supergravity model with an F-theory realization,
we must have a lattice embedding
Λ ,→H2(B, Z)
(5.2)
which can be associated with an explicit map from the vectors a, bi, j into divisor classes
in B so that
a →KB
(5.3)
bi →ξi
(5.4)
j →J
(5.5)
where KB is the canonical divisor, the ξi are eﬀective, irreducible curves, and J is a K¨ahler
class on the base.
Example: T = 1
In [5] we gave an explicit formulation of the map (5.2) for the case T = 1. In that
case, the F-theory base manifold is restricted to be a Hirzebruch surface Fm, whose second
cohomology admits a basis (integral for even m)
e1 = Dv + m
2 Ds
(5.6)
e2 = Ds
(5.7)
in which the intersection form takes the form (2.14). In terms of the coordinates αi, ˜αi for
bi, the divisor associated with each vector bi then becomes
bi →λi
2 (αie1 + ˜αie2) .
(5.8)
The correspondence described through this map gives us an explicit construction of
the topological F-theory data for any supergravity model which can be realized in F-theory.
Not all gauge groups and matter representations associated with anomaly-free supergravity
models, however, have valid F-theory realizations. A complete description of the necessary
and suﬃcient conditions on the low-energy supergravity data which guarantee the existence
of an F-theory construction is somewhat complicated and is left for future work. We now
describe, however, some of the simple constraints necessary for a model to have an F-theory
realization. As we discuss in Section 6, these constraints are suﬃcient to rule out a number
of apparently-consistent models at T < 9 and all inﬁnite families of apparently-consistent
models at T ≥9.
†except for the metric on the hypermultiplet moduli space
– 19 –

[PDF PAGE 21]
5.2 F-theory constraints on low-energy supergravity
Lattice embedding
The ﬁrst condition which is clearly necessary to realize a model in F-theory is the
embedding condition (5.2), which states that the lattice Λ must admit an embedding into
H2(B, Z) for some F-theory base B. The space H2(B, Z), as we discuss in detail below,
has the structure of a unimodular lattice. The embedding condition (5.2) thus implies the
existence of a lattice embedding of Λ into a unimodular lattice.
More speciﬁc constraints on which models can be mapped to F-theory can be deter-
mined by giving a complete categorization of the cohomology groups of complex surfaces
B which are acceptable base manifolds for an F-theory compactiﬁcation. To this end we
now discuss in slightly more detail the geometry of the base B, which is a general complex,
K¨ahler, 2-dimensional surface with an eﬀective anti-pluricanonical divisor. (The existence
of such a divisor is a weak form of “positive curvature”.) The space H2(B, Z) has the
structure of a free Z-module (without torsion) of rank b2(B), and the intersection product
deﬁnes a symmetric inner product, making this into a “lattice”. Poincar´e duality further
implies that the lattice with the inner product is self-dual, or equivalently unimodular.
The signature of the lattice is (2h2,0 + 1, h1,1 −1) by the Hodge index theorem, where hi,j
denote the Hodge numbers. If the base B had any holomorphic 1-forms or holomorphic
2-forms, then the total space of the elliptic ﬁbration would also have holomorphic 1-forms
of holomorphic 2-forms, and so it would have enhanced supersymmetry (and necessarily be
of the form (K3 × T 2)/G or T 6/G). Thus, to ensure that the F-theory model has exactly
N = 1 supersymmetry, we must assume that h1,0(B) = h2,0(B) = 0; it follows that the
lattice has signature (1, h1,1 −1).
There are two key properties of the base B which lead to a complete classiﬁcation: ﬁrst,
the line bundles O(−4KB) and O(−6KB) have sections f and g (which serve as coeﬃcients
in the Weierstrass equation of the F-theory model), and second, h1,0(B) = h2,0(B) = 0. It
then follows from the classiﬁcation of algebraic surfaces (see for example [31]) that either
B is an Enriques surface, B = P2, or B is the blowup of a Hirzebruch surface Fm in
k ≥0 points. A third property—that there is no curve in B along which f vanishes at
least 4 times and g vanishes at least 6 times (the “minimal” property of a Weierstrass
equation)—guarantees that |m| ≤12 [28].
The number of tensor multiplets in the low-energy theory is T = h1,1 −1 [28], and
so H2(B, Z) is a T + 1 dimensional unimodular lattice of signature (1, T). If the lattice
is even, then by Milnor’s theorem [32] we must have T ≡1 (mod 8) and the lattice is
isomorphic (as a Z-module) to U ⊕E8(−1)⊕k, where
U =
 
0 1
1 0
!
.
(5.9)
When the lattice is odd, then the lattice is isomorphic to ZT+1 with the inner product
– 20 –

[PDF PAGE 22]
diag{+1, −1, −1, · · · , −1}. The only bases with even lattices are the Hirzebruch surfaces
Fm for even m, with lattice U, and the Enriques surface with lattice U ⊕E8(−1). All other
possible bases are blowups of Hirzebruch surfaces Fm, |m| ≤12, and P2, all of which lead
to odd lattices.
To summarize, given a low-energy theory with T tensor multiplets characterized by the
lattice Λ, an F-theory realization can only exist if Λ embeds, as a lattice, into a signature
(1, T) unimodular lattice.
In F-theory, the lattice H2(B, Z) ∼= H2(B, Z) corresponds to the charge lattice of BPS
states obtained by wrapping D3 branes on curves in B. This is precisely the charge lattice
of BPS dyonic string states ˜Λ, discussed in Section 2.3, into which there must be a lattice
embedding Λ ,→˜Λ. A similar unimodularity condition arises in the compactiﬁcation of the
heterotic string on the torus, from modular invariance of the world-sheet string theory. It
is interesting to speculate whether this kind of unimodularity condition may be a general
consistency condition for any quantum 6D supergravity theory. It may be, for example,
that such a condition is necessary for unitarity of the theory. We leave further investigation
of this question to future work.
Constraint on canonical class and singular divisors
F-theory imposes strong constraints on the possible values of a. From (5.3), a maps to
the canonical class KB of B. For those surfaces with H2(B, Z) ∼= U, we can always choose
a basis so that a →KB = (−2, −2) as discussed in Section 2. For the Enriques surface,
KB = a = 0. For all the remaining surfaces, we can choose a basis with respect to which
H2(B, Z) has inner product diag{+1, −1, −1, · · · , −1}, and such that KB takes the form
−KB = (3, −1, −1, . . . , −1) .
(5.10)
This imposes substantial constraints on the choice of a. In particular, a is primitive‡ in all
cases with odd lattices.
The geometry of elliptic ﬁbrations implies that vectors bi must map to eﬀective irre-
ducible divisors ξi in any F-theory realization under the map in (5.4). This constraint has
various consequences, an example of which is the following:
Claim: If b2 < 0, then the vector b must be primitive in any F-theory realization.
We prove this by contradiction; assume that b maps to an irreducible, eﬀective divisor ξ,
and that b2 < 0 with b a non-primitive vector. Then, there exists an integer n > 1 such
that the class ξ′ := ξ/n is integral and, therefore, an eﬀective divisor. Now, ξ′ · ξ < 0, and
since ξ is an irreducible, eﬀective divisor this implies that ξ′ must contain ξ as a component.
This is impossible because it would require the class (1/n −k)ξ to be eﬀective, for integers
k ≥1, n ≥2.
‡A lattice vector v is primitive if 1
dv is not a lattice vector ∀d ∈Z, |d|̸ = 1.
– 21 –

[PDF PAGE 23]
These conditions on a, bi impose further constraints on which supergravity models can
be compatible with F-theory.
Positivity conditions and the K¨ahler and Mori cones
As noted above, the supergravity constraint that all gauge ﬁelds have kinetic terms of
the correct sign, j · bi > 0, has a corresponding interpretation in F-theory. In F-theory,
the divisors ξi supporting the singularity giving rise to nonabelian gauge group factors
must all be eﬀective and irreducible, from which it follows that J · ξi > 0 where J is the
K¨ahler form of B. This is an example of an F-theory constraint with a clear analogue in
the low-energy theory. In F-theory there is a similar constraint on the (negative of the)
canonical class −KB, so that for all F-theory compactiﬁcations −KB·J > 0. This constraint
has no obvious counterpart in supergravity. Note, however, that just as supersymmetry
constrains the action so that the gauge kinetic term is proportional to −j · bi tr F 2
i [9], a
similar argument suggests that the action should have a higher-derivative term proportional
to j · a tr R2. Such higher-derivative terms can have sign constraints from causality [33];
we leave a further exploration of this possible constraint on low-energy models for further
work.
To understand the F-theory constraints on ξi and J more clearly, it is helpful to
describe in more detail the structure of the K¨ahler cone and dual Mori cone.
As discussed in Section 2, the low-energy theories have an SO(1, T)/SO(T) moduli
space of tensor multiplet scalars and a hypermultiplet moduli space.
In the F-theory
compactiﬁcations we are considering, the h1,1(B) = T + 1 K¨ahler moduli of the base
correspond to the tensor moduli space (except the overall volume of B, which is in a
hypermultiplet), while the complex structure moduli of the elliptic ﬁbration correspond to
the hypermultiplet moduli space of the low-energy theory. The K¨ahler metric is completely
speciﬁed by a choice of K¨ahler form J ∈H1,1(B, R) ∼= H2(B, Z) ⊗R. Therefore, J is a
vector in the space R1,T which can be normalized to satisfy Vol(B) = 1 =
1
2J · J.
To
study the structure of the moduli space, we can imagine starting with a ﬁxed vector J and
looking at the transformations of R1,T that generate inequivalent K¨ahler forms. The total
space of such transformations is SO(1, T); SO(T) transformations in the transverse space
orthogonal to J do not change the metric, and so the moduli space of inequivalent metrics
is (locally) parameterized by SO(1, T)/SO(T).
In general, B has an automorphism group eΓ and some quotient Γ of eΓ acts faithfully
on H2(B, Z). For example, if B = F0 or B is the blowup of F0 at a single point, then
Γ ∼= Z2, while if B is the blowup of F0 at two distinct points then Γ is the dihedral group of
order 12. Note that Γ must be a subgroup of Aut(H2(B, Z)), the automorphism group of
the lattice (which leaves the inner product invariant). The subgroup Γ ⊂Aut(H2(B, Z))
induced by automorphisms of B introduces a further identiﬁcation on the moduli space,
since these just correspond to large diﬀeomorphisms. The moduli space of ﬁxed volume,
– 22 –

[PDF PAGE 24]
K¨ahler metrics is then
MK ⊂Γ\SO(1, T)/SO(T)
(5.11)
This locally agrees with the structure of the moduli space we see from the low-energy
theory. The discrete group Γ ⊂Aut(H2(B, Z)) corresponds to the S-duality group; in the
T = 1 cases this was discussed in [34].
The constraint on J from the F-theory side is that J must lie within the K¨ahler cone
of the base surface. Since h2,0(B) = 0, the Kleiman criterion [35] characterizes the K¨ahler
cone as the set of those J such that (1) J · J > 0 and, (2) for all eﬀective divisors D,
J · D > 0. If we normalize the volume to 1, the ﬁrst condition simply states that J lies in
SO(1, T)/SO(T) as above. To analyze the second condition, it is useful to work with the
dual of the K¨ahler cone, called the Mori cone [36], which is the set of linear combinations
P riDi of eﬀective divisors Di using nonnegative real coeﬃcients ri. A K¨ahler class J is
outside the K¨ahler cone if J ·D < 0 for D an eﬀective divisor. For such K¨ahler classes, there
is no known F-theory vacuum construction. Note that the K¨ahler cone is thus essentially
deﬁned in terms of the Mori cone.
The F-theory constraint that ξi is eﬀective and irreducible implies that ξi lies within the
Mori cone for B. Thus, it follows from combining this constraint with the deﬁnition of the
K¨ahler cone that J ·ξi > 0 for all i, though the Mori cone and K¨ahler cone conditions taken
together are a stronger set of constraints than this inequality which we can understand from
the low-energy theory.
As an example of the Mori cone and dual K¨ahler cone, consider the bases Fm, which
lead to T = 1. For these bases B, the set of eﬀective divisors is generated by Dv and Ds,
with intersection pairings
Dv · Dv = −m,
Dv · Ds = 1,
Ds · Ds = 0 .
(5.12)
Eﬀective divisors corresponding to irreducible curves are given by
Dv,
aDv + bDs, a ≥0, b ≥ma .
(5.13)
In this case, the Mori cone occupies the ﬁrst quadrant {aDv + bDs | a ≥0, b ≥0}, and
the dual K¨ahler cone can be described as {aDv + bDs | a ≥0, b ≥ma}. The volume one
classes in the K¨ahler cone are those aDv + bDs with a > 0 for which
b = ma2 + 1
2a
.
(5.14)
As another example of a K¨ahler cone, we consider the blowup of F1 in a single point
away from Dv (which coincides with the blowup of P2 at two distinct points). We can take
as a basis for H1,1(B) the exceptional divisor E as well as curves Dv and Ds −E, where
Dv and Ds are pulled back from F1. (Note that Ds −E is the proper transform of that
ﬁber on F1 which passed through the point which was blown up.) In this basis, if we write
a putative K¨ahler class as J = aE + bDv + c(Ds −E) then
J2 = −a2 −b2 + 2ac + 2bc −c2
(5.15)
– 23 –

[PDF PAGE 25]
b
a
Figure 1: K¨ahler cone for the one point blowup of F1 away from Dv.
so if we set the volume to one we can solve for c:
c = a + b ±
√
2ab −1.
(5.16)
We learn that ab ≥1
2; also, since J·Ds = b and Ds is eﬀective, a and b must be positive. The
set of such volume one classes can be represented as a double cover of the semi-hyperbola
ab ≥1
2 branched on the boundary.
We now investigate the conditions on the K¨ahler cone imposed by the various eﬀective
divisors. We have
J · E = −a + c = b ±
√
2ab −1
(5.17)
J · Dv = −b + c = a ±
√
2ab −1
(5.18)
J · (Ds −E) = a + b −c = ∓
√
2ab −1.
(5.19)
Since all of these must be nonnegative, we must have c = a + b −
√
2ab −1 (which selects
one of the two branches of the double cover), as well as b ≥
√
2ab −1 and a ≥
√
2ab −1.
These latter two conditions are additional semi-hyperbolas in the a −b plane, and the
region they deﬁne is illustrated in Figure 1 above.
Note that the Z2 automorphism in this example exchanges the curves Dv and E, and
so acts to exchange a and b in the equations and ﬁgure above.
Kodaira condition
The Kodaira condition corresponds to the mathematical requirement that the elliptic
ﬁbration over B with singularities on the divisors ξi associated with nonabelian group
factors gives a Calabi-Yau manifold. This condition states that
−12KB =
X
i
νiξi + Y
(5.20)
where KB is the canonical divisor, νi are multiplicities associated with diﬀerent singularity
types (e.g. N for SU(N), 6 for SO(8), 10 for E8, etc.), and Y is a residual divisor, which
– 24 –

[PDF PAGE 26]
must be a sum of eﬀective divisors and satisﬁes J ·Y > 0 unless Y = 0. Pulling this relation
back to the low-energy theory, this condition becomes
j · (−12a −
X
i
νibi) ≥0.
(5.21)
This condition is also helpful as a simple guide in determining which low-energy theories
admit an F-theory realization.
Weierstrass model
As far as we know, the existence of a map (5.2) to a prospective F-theory base does
not guarantee that there is an F-theory construction for a given model, even when all the
topological and K¨ahler cone conditions just listed are satisﬁed. An explicit elliptic ﬁbration
must be constructed with correct singularity types for the desired matter content; this is
generally accomplished using Weierstrass models, the Kodaira singularity classiﬁcation,
and the Tate algorithm [28, 37].
We do not know any general way to prove from the
topological data that there exists a Weierstrass model with the desired properties. In [5]
we gave explicit constructions of Weierstrass models for some simple low-energy gauge
group and matter combinations with T = 1. We found that in these cases there is a precise
correspondence between the number of degrees of freedom needed in the Weierstrass model
to construct given gauge and matter content and the associated value of H −V in the
low-energy model. Based on this correspondence we conjectured (by a simple degree of
freedom counting) that it will always be possible to construct Weierstrass models precisely
when the gravitational anomaly bound on H −V is not exceeded. It would be nice to
have either a proof of this conjecture, or an explicit counterexample. Note, however, that
there are various matter combinations found in [5] which do not currently have known F-
theory realizations through explicit local Weierstrass constructions. A proof of the general
conjecture that Weierstrass models exist for any model admitting a map (5.2) satisfying
the various topological F-theory conditions would presumably require a more complete
understanding of the range of possible matter content which can be produced by local
singularities, even in the case T = 1.
6. Examples
In the previous section we have described some features of the geometrical data underlying
any F-theory construction. We do not have a completely determined set of rules which can
be used to identify the subset of low-energy supergravity theories which do have F-theory
realizations. What does seem to be the case, however, is that when no map of the form
(5.2) exists from Λ, a, bi, j into the geometry associated with any possible F-theory base
B for a given low-energy model, or one of the previously listed constraints such as the
Kodaira condition is violated, there is no known string construction of that low-energy
model. Models which do not admit such a map must at the present time be regarded as
– 25 –

[PDF PAGE 27]
lying in the “swampland” [38] consisting of theories which cannot be ruled out from low-
energy considerations and yet which cannot be realized in string theory. In this section we
describe some explicit examples of such low-energy models with no known string theory
realization.
We focus in this section on explicit examples of low-energy theories which illustrate
various features of the associated lattice and F-theory map. We begin with several examples
encountered in the previous paper [5] on T = 1 models. We ﬁrst describe a large class of
simple models which do apparently admit F-theory realizations, and then describe models
where the F-theory map does not lead to acceptable divisors.
The lattice embedding
language clariﬁes the issues involved in these cases. We then return to the inﬁnite families
described in Section 4, and show how these families violate some of the conditions for
F-theory constructions.
6.1 Examples with F-theory realizations: SU(N) product models at T = 1
In [5] we systematically analyzed a simple general class of supergravity models, considering
all models with gauge group factors SU(N), N ≥4 and matter in fundamental, bifunda-
mental, and antisymmetric tensor representations. We identiﬁed all 16,418 models of this
type which satisfy anomaly cancellation at T = 1. We performed some basic checks which
indicated that the topological conditions such as the Kodaira condition are satisﬁed auto-
matically for all these models as a consequence of the anomaly cancellation conditions. We
developed Weierstrass models for a few of these theories and found that generally the num-
ber of degrees of freedom ﬁxed in the Weierstrass polynomial description matched precisely
with the contribution to H −V from each part of the model. This is expected, as the num-
ber of unﬁxed degrees of freedom corresponding to moduli in the model should correspond
to the number of uncharged hypermultiplets. This agreement makes it seem plausible that
all the models in this class, which satisfy all the F-theory topological conditions, have true
F-theory realizations through Weierstrass models. As we discuss below, the close agree-
ment between supergravity anomaly constraints and topological F-theory constraints seems
particularly strong at T = 1; for larger values of T, we ﬁnd more apparently satisfactory
low-energy supergravity models which cannot be realized in F-theory; examples of this type
even arise among the class of models with SU(N) gauge group factors restricted to matter
in fundamental, bifundamental, and antisymmetric tensor representations.
6.2 Example: Embedding failure
In [5] we found a number of models at T = 1 which do not seem to have acceptable F-
theory counterparts. It is illuminating to consider these models from the point of view of
the lattice embedding Λ →H2(B, Z). One problematic model encountered in [5] has the
following structure:
– 26 –

[PDF PAGE 28]
G = SU(4)
matter = 1 × adjoint + 10 ×
+ 40 ×
(6.1)
Λ =
 
8 10
10 10
!
(6.2)
H −V = 220
(6.3)
It is not hard to check that this lattice Λ cannot be integrally embedded in any uni-
modular SO(1, 1) lattice. In particular, there is no embedding in the lattice U, where we
can choose −a = (2, 2); then in terms of (2.16) we have α, ˜α = 5 ±
√
5. There is also no
integral embedding in the lattice diag (+1, −1). Choosing −a = (3, −1), we have b = (x, y)
with 3x + y = 10, x2 −y2 = 10, with no integer solutions.
Thus, this model seems not to have a realization in F-theory. A similar situation arises
for the same group with one adjoint, 11 antisymmetric and 44 fundamental representations,
with H −V = 242. These models are the only ones we have encountered explicitly at
T = 1 which do not have a unimodular lattice embedding. It would be very interesting to
understand whether there is a novel string construction which could lead to models such
as these, or if the absence of a unimodular embedding can be related to a breakdown of
consistency for a general quantum gravity theory.
6.3 Example: Outside the Mori cone
Another class of models we found in [5] which does not appear to admit an F-theory
realization has less extreme problems. For example, consider a model with
G = SU(N)
matter = 1 ×
+ (N −8) ×
(6.4)
Λ =
 
8 −1
−1 −1
!
(6.5)
This model has an embedding into the lattice diag (+1, −1) realized through the vec-
tors −a = (3, −1), b = (0, −1). If we identify the lattice diag (+1, −1) with the second
cohomology of F1 by using the standard basis (Du, Dv) with Du = Dv +Ds (which satisﬁes
D2
u = 1, D2
v = −1, Dv · Du = 0), then the class −a maps to 3Du −Dv = 2Dv + 3Ds which
coincides with −KF1. However, b maps to −Dv, which is not an eﬀective class, so this
embedding does not send the vector b into the Mori cone. In fact, further checking shows
that no embedding in this case maps a to KF1 while sending b into the Mori cone. Thus,
there is no F-theory realization of these models.
There are a number of other low-energy models which do not admit an F-theory
realization in the analysis of [5], and which suﬀer from similar “cone” problems when
a lattice embedding is found. For example, we encountered in [39] a model with structure
– 27 –

[PDF PAGE 29]
G = SU(24) × SO(8)
matter = 3 × ( , 1)
(6.6)
Λ =



8 3 −1
3 1 0
−1 0 −1



(6.7)
H −V = 225
(6.8)
This lattice is degenerate and admits an embedding into diag (+1, −1) through
−a = (3, −1)
(6.9)
b1 = (1, 0)
(6.10)
b2 = (0, −1)
(6.11)
Just as above, this is compatible with the intersection form on F1, but where b2 →−Dv,
giving a class outside the Mori cone.
It would be interesting to investigate whether there is some residue of the Mori cone
constraint in low-energy supergravity. One can imagine that a class of apparently-consistent
low-energy theories with no F-theory realization may be given by a novel stringy construc-
tion analogous to F-theory outside the Mori cone (or its dual, the K¨ahler cone).
It is
familiar from type II compactiﬁcation that passing outside the K¨ahler cone may give valid
orbifold or non-geometric Landau-Ginzburg phases of string compactiﬁcations [40]. This
seems harder to understand in the F-theory context, where the moduli are real,§ than in
the type II context, where the moduli are complex and it is easier to continuously deform a
model to a region outside the K¨ahler cone. In any case, it would be interesting to explore
this phenomenon in F-theory, or through dual constructions.
6.4 Example: New possibilities and constraints for T > 1
When the number of tensor multiplets T increases, the constraint from the gravitational
anomaly becomes stronger as H −V ≤273 −29T. This would seem to more strongly
constrain the number of possible models. In general, models which are possible at T = 1
continue to be acceptable until T is so large that the number of charged hypermultiplets
exceeds the constraint from the gravitational anomaly; in most cases this can be realized by
simply adding an additional unit to −a in the extra negative-deﬁnite dimension provided
by each additional tensor multiplet.
Because the dimensionality of the space in which
a, bi are embedded increases as T increases, however, new possibilities for combinations
of gauge group factors arise. Although this increases the number of apparently-consistent
§Note that in another context with real K¨ahler moduli – compactiﬁcations of M theory to ﬁve dimensions
– some of the walls of the K¨ahler cone serve as obstructions to further deformation [41, 42].
– 28 –

[PDF PAGE 30]
supergravity models, F-theory realizations of these new possibilities at larger values of T
are more strongly constrained by the condition of embeddability in a unimodular lattice.
SU(N) factors at T = 2
A simple example of how the situation changes at increased T is given by the class
of models having gauge group factors SU(N) with matter only in the fundamental repre-
sentation. Anomaly cancellation conditions require that the number of fundamentals for
each such factor is f = 2N. At T = 1, models with a single SU(N) gauge group factor
are possible up to N = 15 by the gravitational anomaly condition. It seems that these
models all admit F-theory realizations. The associated divisor in F2 for these models is Dv,
and −K = 2Dv + 4Ds, so all topological constraints are satisﬁed for each of these models.
We constructed explicit Weierstrass models for this family of models up to SU(14) in [5],
and believe that such a model exists for SU(15), though the algebra needed to explicitly
construct such a solution becomes complicated.
Now consider models with multiple SU(N) factors under each of which all matter
transforms under either the trivial or fundamental representation. The vector b associated
with an SU(N) factor with f = 2N fundamental matter ﬁelds must satisfy a·b = 0, b2 = −2.
At T = 1, we cannot have a model with more than one such SU(N) factor and only
fundamental matter, since a · b = 0 gives a unique vector b up a scale factor. When we
consider analogous models at T = 2, however, the situation is rather diﬀerent. Consider a
group G = SU(N)×SU(N) where each of the matter ﬁelds transforms in the fundamental
representation of at most one SU(N) factor (we assume for simplicity that there are no
bifundamental matter ﬁelds). For T = 1, as just mentioned, there is no consistent model
with physical gauge kinetic terms. On the other hand, when T > 1, we have the same inner
products a · bi, bi · bj, but the vectors b1, b2 need not be linearly dependent. The associated
lattice is
Λ =



9 −T
0
0
0
−2 0
0
0 −2



(6.12)
From the low-energy point of view this seems like a perfectly acceptable model. There
is, however, no embedding of this lattice into a unimodular lattice for T = 2.
In the
canonical form of the SO(1, 2) metric diag (+1, −1, −1), where −a = (3, −1, −1), if we
write b = (x, y, z) for integral x, y, z then we must have
3x + y + z = 0
(6.13)
x2 −y2 −z2 = −2 .
(6.14)
The only solutions to these Diophantine equations are
b = (0, 1, −1),
b = (0, −1, 1) ,
(6.15)
so we cannot have two vectors b1, b2 in a (1, 2) unimodular lattice which are perpendicular
both to one another and to a, where both have norm −2. Thus, though at T = 2 this
– 29 –

[PDF PAGE 31]
model seems perfectly acceptable from the low-energy point of view, it cannot be realized
through F-theory by any known mechanism.
We see from this example that as T increases, the constraints on which gauge fac-
tors and matter content can be combined in the low-energy theory are reduced, and the
unimodular embedding constraint becomes a stronger constraint. This seems to be a gen-
eral feature of models at T > 1. Thus, the fraction of models in the swampland seems
to increase at larger T, even though the gravitational anomaly constraint becomes more
stringent.
6.5 Example: Inﬁnite families at T ≥9
In Section (4.1) we described an inﬁnite family of models at T ≥9 analogous to the
SU(N) × SU(N) models shown by Schwarz to satisfy anomaly factorization at T = 1
in [25]. It is clear from the above discussion that these models violate the consistency
conditions needed for an F-theory construction. Note that the a and bi’s from (4.2) satisfy
−a = b1 + b2 at T = 9. This means that Y = −12a −N(b1 + b2) must have j · Y < 0
at N > 12, violating the Kodaira condition (5.21). The vectors listed in (4.2) are not
uniquely determined, so one may suspect that there might exist another choice of vectors
that satisfy the necessary conditions for an F-theory embedding.
This is not possible,
however. The preceding argument can be strengthened and generalized along the following
lines to show that no inﬁnite family of models can be realized in F-theory at T = 9. For
any such model we have, as discussed in case 2 in the proof in Section 3, a · (b1 + b2) = 0
and (b1 + b2)2 = 0. For T = 9, a2 = 0 so a is a null (type Z) vector. It follows that
b1 + b2 = −xa. Moreover, since −a, b1, b2 are eﬀective, we have x > 0. The vector a must
be primitive in F-theory, and can be put in the form −a = (3, −1, −1, · · · ), so x is an
integer. So, j · Y = j · (−12a)(1 −aNx), where aN is N
12 for SU(N), N+6
12
for SO(2N), N
12
for Sp(N
2 ) [28]. Since aN grows with N in all three cases, at large enough N we must have
j ·Y < 0. It follows that the Kodaira condition is violated at large enough N. This bounds
the range of N at T = 9 for any of the inﬁnite classes of models considered in case 2 in the
proof of ﬁniteness. Note that in [43], the SU(N) × SU(N) model with 9 tensor multiplets
was identiﬁed for N = 8.
We also described in Section 4.2 an inﬁnite family of models with gauge group Ek
8 and
T = 9 + 8k for arbitrary k. For the vectors −a, bi listed in (4.4), there is no F-theory
realization. This is because the residual locus in such an embedding is not eﬀective. It is
easily checked that
j · Y = 12j · (−a) −10
k
X
i=1
j · bi
= 12(4k + 8) −|j0|(10k + 36)
< 12(4k + 8) −(10k + 36)
√
4k + 8 < 0, for k ≥1
(6.16)
This conclusion depends upon the choice of vectors in 4.4. Note that the k = 2 member of
– 30 –

[PDF PAGE 32]
this family can be realized in heterotic-M-theory compactiﬁed on K3 × S1/Z2, as outlined
in [34]. The fact that this inﬁnite family of models cannot be realized in F-theory also
follows, however, from a more general argument which we now give.
In fact, there is a uniform bound on the rank of the total gauge group which holds
for all F-theory models (although we do not know precisely what the bound is), and this
excludes the inﬁnite family with gauge group Ek
8 as well as all other inﬁnite families. To see
that there is such a bound, note that, as discussed previously, the base B of any F-theory
model must admit a map to a minimal surface Bmin which is either an Enriques surface,
P2, or one of the Hirzebruch surfaces Fm with |m| ≤12. The coeﬃcients f and g in the
Weierstrass equation of the F-theory model push forward to sections ¯f ∈H0(−4KBmin)
and ¯g ∈H0(−6KBmin), with an induced discriminant ¯∆= {4 ¯f3 +27¯g2 = 0} ∈|−12KBmin|.
Now each component of the gauge group is either associated to a component of ¯∆(with its
rank determined by the multiplicity) or to a singular point of ¯∆which is blown up by the
map B →Bmin. The multiplicities of the components of ¯∆are uniformly bounded (since
−12KBmin can be written as a sum of eﬀective divisors in only ﬁnitely many ways), so we
only need to show that the total ranks of gauge groups coming from singular points are
bounded. Note that when Bmin is an Enriques surface, ¯∆is empty so there is nothing to
check.
For each ﬁxed Bmin which is not an Enriques surface, we consider the set of all possible
pairs ( ¯f, ¯g) ⊂H0(−4KBmin)⊕H0(−6KBmin). We can stratify this set according to the types
of singularities of ¯∆which appear, and each stratum is a locally closed algebraic subset.
Moreover, each stratum has a unique associated gauge group, and so there is a speciﬁc
rank which is associated to it.
But the Hilbert basis theorem implies that any stratiﬁcation of an aﬃne algebraic
variety into locally closed algebraic subsets has only ﬁnitely many strata. Thus, there are
only ﬁnitely many possible diﬀerent gauge groups which can occur, so in particular, their
ranks must be bounded. And since there are only ﬁnitely many possibilities for Bmin (other
than Enriques surfaces), there is a uniform bound for all F-theory models. As in the proof
of ﬁniteness from Section 3, this also shows that there is a ﬁnite number of distinct gauge
groups and matter representations which can be realized through F-theory.
7. Global picture of the 6D N = 1 landscape
The strong constraints which anomalies place on nonabelian gauge group structure and
matter content in N = 1 6D theories have given us a global outline of which of these
supergravity theories have the potential to describe consistent quantum theories. Explicit
knowledge of this set of theories gives us a powerful tool for exploring the connection
between string theory and low-energy physics. We can in principle make a list of the ﬁnite
number of possible theories with T < 9.
For each of the various approaches to string
compactiﬁcation (heterotic, F-theory, . . . ) we can then determine which subset of these
possible theories can be realized through each class of construction. For T > 8, there are
– 31 –

[PDF PAGE 33]
inﬁnite families of models satisfying the known low-energy consistency conditions, and our
analytic control of the total space is weaker. In this section we summarize some of our
knowledge regarding the extent and connectivity of the 6D N = 1 supergravity landscape.
Note that the term “landscape” is often used to denote a space of eﬀective theories
containing discrete points with no massless moduli (ﬂat directions). Generally such a land-
scape includes supersymmetric AdS vacua in addition to metastable dS vacua with broken
supersymmetry. In the case of six-dimensional vacua, it is actually impossible to stabi-
lize all the moduli while preserving supersymmetry. In Minkowski space, the gravitational
anomaly condition H −V + 29T = 273 makes it impossible to avoid moduli. Since the
tensor multiplet contains massless scalars, to avoid tensor moduli we must have T = 0.
This implies that H ≥273 and therefore we have hypermultiplet moduli. In six dimen-
sions, there are also no N = 1 supersymmetric AdS vacua. This can be seen from the fact
that there are no AdS6 superalgebras with 8 supercharges in the Nahm classiﬁcation [44].
The “landscape” in this paper refers to the complete moduli space of 6D gravity theories
with one supersymmetry, although all these vacua are Minkowski and have massless scalar
moduli.
7.1 Extent of the space of 6D supergravities
For T = 1, our understanding of the space of theories, while still incomplete in many
respects, seems to suggest a simple global picture.
There are a ﬁnite number of low-
energy nonabelian gauge groups and matter content which are compatible with anomaly
cancellation and physical constraints on gauge kinetic terms. We have an explicit approach
to embedding these models into F-theory, which seems successful for almost all acceptable
gauge groups and matter content. There are a few exotic combinations of gauge groups and
matter representations which give lattices which cannot be embedded into any unimodular
lattice associated with an acceptable F-theory base. For the moment, these models live in
the swampland. In the T = 1 supergravity landscape there are also some models which we
have found whose realization in F-theory would require divisors outside the Mori cone. This
may correspond to a new class of orbifold or non-geometric F-theory construction whose
precise implementation remains to be elucidated. For the vast majority of T = 1 models,
we have an explicit map from each model to a set of divisor classes in a given F-theory
base. Degree of freedom counting suggests that this topological data can be completed to
a full F-theory construction through a Weierstrass model, though a proof of this assertion
in a general context remains to be found. We have not addressed here the question of U(1)
factors in the gauge group and their associated charges. The anomaly constraints on U(1)
factors are more complicated [13] and lead to systems of Diophantine equations, whose
analysis will be discussed elsewhere [8].
We have shown in this paper that the situation for T < 9 is similar to that for T = 1
as a2 is positive. Again, there are a ﬁnite number of distinct nonabelian groups and matter
representations possible for this class of models. As T increases, it seems to be easier to
construct models which violate the conditions outlined in Section 5.2 and which, therefore,
– 32 –

[PDF PAGE 34]
have no F-theory realization. Thus, the apparent swampland increases as T increases.
For T ≥9, however, the situation changes dramatically.
As a2 becomes negative,
inﬁnite families of apparently-consistent low-energy theories appear. Some inﬁnite families
arise at ﬁxed T, such as an inﬁnite family we have explicitly constructed with gauge group
SU(N) × SU(N) at T ≥9.
The inﬁnite families at ﬁnite T must contain a bounded
number of gauge group factors, as shown in Section 3. Other inﬁnite families of models
extend to arbitrarily large values of T, and the number of simple factors in the gauge group
can become unbounded as T →∞. The inﬁnite families described in Section 4 satisfy the
unimodular embedding constraint, indicating that this constraint is not a strong constraint
for the existence of an F-theory construction. As shown in Section 6.5, however, the inﬁnite
families we have explicitly constructed are not compatible with other constraints from F-
theory, such as the Kodaira constraint.
The bounded rank argument in Section 6.5 shows that the number of 6D N = 1
supergravity models compatible with F-theory must be ﬁnite. A heuristic version of this
argument is as follows: each of the nonabelian gauge group factors Gi and associated
matter ﬁelds are realized in F-theory by tuning the coeﬃcients of polynomials f, g in the
Weierstrass model
y2 = x3 + fx + g .
(7.1)
For any F-theory model on a blowup of a space Fm, f, g can be thought of as sections of
−4K, −6K respectively over (a generally singular) Fm, and have a ﬁxed number of total
coeﬃcients available for tuning (roughly 244 = 273−29). Since each gauge group factor and
associated matter require tuning additional coeﬃcients to achieve the desired singularity
type for the ﬁbration (which may be at a singular point in the base which needs to be blown
up), only a ﬁnite number of distinct combinations of gauge groups and matter content can
be realized in this fashion.
This argument can be translated into the language of the low-energy supergravity the-
ory. As described in [5], in any 6D N = 1 supergravity theory the set of ﬁelds can be
decomposed into “blocks” associated with the simple factors in the gauge group and asso-
ciated matter representations. The ﬁniteness argument above for F-theory models suggests
that, for models consistent with F-theory, each block added to a model must contribute
positively to H−V +29T. This is certainly the case for most supergravity blocks associated
with F-theory singularities which we understand. We leave a more general and rigorous
proof of these assertions for future work, but this argument suggests that by classifying in-
dividual blocks which contribute positive values H −V +29T we should in principle be able
to enumerate all of the ﬁnite set of supergravity models with possible F-theory realizations
at any ﬁxed T, even when exotic matter ﬁelds such as those encountered in [5] are included
for which the F-theory singularity type is not yet classiﬁed. Including the transitions we
discuss in the following subsection which change the value of T, corresponding to blowing
up singular points on the F-theory base, would in principle make it possible to connect the
entire ﬁnite set of F-theory vacua in terms of the low-energy structure.
– 33 –

[PDF PAGE 35]
It was recently shown that all 10D supergravity theories not realized in string theory
are inconsistent as quantum theories [45]. It was conjectured in [3] that this “string uni-
versality” property holds for 6D N = 1 supergravities. Whether or not this is true, it is
interesting to speculate that the constraints associated with F-theory constructions may
have some shadow in the low-energy theory which can lead to new quantum consistency
conditions for 6D supergravities. For example, the constraint that Λ be embeddable in a
unimodular lattice, or the sign constraint −a · j > 0 may be realizable in some simple way
as consistency conditions on any low-energy supergravity theory, as discussed in Section 5.
For other constraints, such as the detailed constraints on the form of a or the K¨ahler/Mori
cone, it is harder to see how such conditions can arise directly from the supergravity de-
scription. It may be that these conditions can best be understood in terms of the BPS
string states underlying the anomaly lattice Λ; we hope to return to this question in future
work.
7.2 Charting the space of supergravities with string constructions
One important question is whether the constraints imposed by F-theory are satisﬁed by
all 6D models arising from string constructions, or whether they are just signatures of an
F-theory “corner” of the 6D supergravity landscape. We have looked at some examples
of 6D theories realized through other string constructions, including CFTs and Gepner
models [46, 47], orientifold models [48, 43] intersecting brane models [49, 50], heterotic
constructions [2, 39], and non-geometric string vacua [51]. In general, at least from a limited
sampling, it seems that most of the low-energy theories associated with these constructions
can be mapped to acceptable data for an F-theory construction, so F-theory seems to cover
a large fraction of the space of 6D low-energy theories which can be realized through any
string construction. It would, however, clearly be desirable to explore the other branches of
string theory more completely, to develop a more systematic understanding of how the sets
of low-energy theories arising from other string constructions intersect with those coming
from F-theory, and to ascertain whether the constraints described in 5.2 are truly universal
stringy constraints for 6D N = 1 theories.
One exception we have encountered to the general existence of F-theory constructions
is given by a class of heterotic line bundle constructions described in [39]. In that paper we
analyzed a class of low-energy models arising from heterotic string compactiﬁcations which
are also characterized by lattices, but in a slightly diﬀerent fashion than those models
considered here. For a ﬁxed gauge group containing factors U(N) × U(M), the models
examined in [39] can have some number of bifundamental matter ﬁelds in the (N, ¯
M) +
( ¯N, M) representation and some number of bifundamental matter ﬁelds in the (N, M) +
( ¯N, ¯
M) representation. Each type of ﬁeld contributes in the same way to the anomaly
polynomials, so models with the same total number of bifundamental ﬁelds map through
(5.2) to identical F-theory constructions. We do not know of any mechanism in F-theory as
it currently exists to construct models with diﬀerent distributions of bifundamental matter
ﬁelds of these two types.
Thus, in this class of models the heterotic theory generates
– 34 –

[PDF PAGE 36]
models which cannot be realized in F-theory, although these models do not violate any
of the constraints described in Section 5.2.
It would be nice to no whether there is a
generalization of F-theory which would capture these heterotic models with mixed classes
of bifundamental ﬁelds.
One class of models which we have not yet considered is the class of gauged supergravity
models [52, 20]. It may be possible to perform a similar analysis of general 6D gauged
supergravity models, although the signiﬁcance of such supergravity theories is unclear as
they do not give rise to stable Minkowski vacua. We leave this for future work.
7.3 Connectivity of the space of 6D supergravities
In most of this paper, and in the preceding discussion, we have referred to supergravity
models with distinct gauge groups and matter content as distinct “theories” or “models”.
This is not quite correct. In fact, each consistent model with a ﬁxed gauge group and
matter content has a moduli space of vacua. At certain limits in the moduli space, the
theory can develop a singularity and the ﬁeld content can change in a discrete fashion. The
simplest example of this is the phenomenon of Higgsing, familiar from the standard model
and basic quantum ﬁeld theory, in which a vacuum expectation value of scalar ﬁelds breaks
a gauge symmetry, giving mass to a formerly massless gauge ﬁeld while removing one or
more scalar ﬁelds from the spectrum. Such transitions in the full space of six-dimensional
supergravity theories connect diﬀerent branches while preserving the total H −V . More
exotic transitions, studied in [53, 34, 28], arise at singular points where strings become
massless, associated with points in the low-energy theory where j · bi vanishes. Passing
through such transition points can change the number of tensor multiplets in the theory,
still preserving H −V + 29T. In this way, the set of six-dimensional supergravity models
is really a highly-connected space with many branches of diﬀerent dimensionality. The
tools we have developed in this and preceding papers may be useful in exploring the global
structure of this space. For example, the anomaly constraints can be used to characterize
allowed transitions in terms of the ﬁeld content of the low-energy theory. With a better
understanding of what kinds of transitions between branches are allowed, it may be possible
to prove that the space of acceptable models is connected into a single moduli space. Thus,
we may be able to probe the validity of at least the elliptically-ﬁbered version of the Reid
fantasy [54] by analysis of the connectivity structure of the countable set of apparently-
consistent low-energy N = 1 6D supergravity theories.
If in fact it could be shown that the set of consistent low-energy 6D theories is con-
nected, it would provide a picture in which there is a single consistent N = 1 supergravity
theory, with many connected branches having diﬀerent gauge groups and matter content.
If it could be shown that either the entire space of theories, or a connected subset
thereof, corresponds to the set of theories which can be realized by F-theory or other string
constructions, it would give a very simple picture of string theory as a single uniﬁed theory
underlying quantum gravity in 6D. Indeed, it seems likely that this can be realized for the
– 35 –

[PDF PAGE 37]
set of models which can be realized through F-theory, since the various singularity types
realized by tuning the coeﬃcients of f, g in (7.1) are all connected continuously in the
space of coeﬃcients. Thus, at least the space of F-theory compactiﬁcations should form
a connected moduli space, with various branches associated with 6D supergravity theories
with various gauge groups and matter content.
8. Conclusions
In this paper we have addressed some global questions regarding the space of consistent
supergravity theories in six dimensions. We have focused on theories with N = 1 super-
symmetry and nonabelian gauge groups. We have extended our previous analysis of such
theories to incorporate multiple tensor multiplets. We have shown that when the number
of tensor multiplets T is less than 9, there are a ﬁnite number of possible gauge groups
and matter representations possible for such theories. We have identiﬁed inﬁnite families
of models at T = 9 and greater which satisfy anomaly cancellation and which have proper
signs for all gauge kinetic terms.
We have shown that every consistent 6D supergravity theory can be associated with an
integral lattice, associated with the coeﬃcients in the anomaly polynomial. This lattice can
be used to construct topological data for an F-theory compactiﬁcation whenever one exists.
We have found a variety of low-energy supergravity models which do not violate any known
consistency conditions from the low-energy point of view but which have no embedding in
F-theory. The geometrical constraints of F-theory provide criteria for identifying such low-
energy models from the associated lattice structure, and suggest possible new low-energy
consistency conditions for quantum supergravity theories.
The overall picture is that, while for Lagrangian models with only one tensor ﬁeld most
apparently-consistent supergravity theories have realizations in F-theory, for models with
more tensor ﬁelds the vast majority of apparently-consistent models have no known string
realization through F-theory or any other string vacuum construction. Thus, most of these
models lie in the “swampland”. If these models cannot be realized through some novel
string construction, it will indicate that string theory imposes strong constraints on 6D
N = 1 supergravity theories beyond the known stringent anomaly cancellation and gauge
kinetic term sign constraints. If these additional constraints can be understood in terms
of new quantum consistency conditions on the set of low-energy eﬀective theories, it will
provide a new window on general theories of quantum gravity; if not, it will indicate the
existence of stringy constraints which may distinguish string theory from other possible
UV-complete quantum gravity theories.
The perspective and tools developed in this work provide a framework in which it
may be possible to carry out a systematic mapping of the landscape of 6D supergravity
theories. Identifying which subsets of this landscape are associated with the diﬀerent classes
of string vacuum construction, and understanding how the many branches of this landscape
are connected through Higgs and tensionless string transitions, promises to lead to a richer
– 36 –

[PDF PAGE 38]
understanding of how the diﬀerent string constructions are related, and of the nature of the
landscape and the swampland. Such understanding in the simpler case of six dimensions
will hopefully teach us some new lessons which may be relevant in the more complicated
and physically relevant case of four dimensions.
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Allan Adams, Maissam Barkeshli, Mas-
simo Bianchi, Oliver de Wolfe, Thomas Faulkner, Greg Moore, John McGreevy, Satoshi
Nagaoka, Daniel Park, Sakura Sch¨afer-Nameki, John Schwarz and Ergin Sezgin for helpful
discussions. W.T. thanks the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics and the Aspen Center
for Physics for hospitality during various stages of this project, and D.R.M. thanks the
Aspen Center for Physics and the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics for hospitality
during the ﬁnal stages. V.K. thanks the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics for support
through the Graduate Fellows program. This research was supported by the DOE un-
der contract #DE-FC02-94ER40818 and by the National Science Foundation under grants
DMS-0606578 and PHY05-51164. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect
the views of the granting agencies.
References
[1] L. Alvarez-Gaume and E. Witten, “Gravitational Anomalies,” Nucl. Phys. B 234, 269 (1984).
[2] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and P. C. West, “Anomaly Free Chiral Theories In
Six-Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 254, 327 (1985).
[3] V. Kumar and W. Taylor, “String Universality in Six Dimensions,” arXiv:0906.0987
[hep-th].
[4] V. Kumar and W. Taylor, “A bound on 6D N = 1 supergravities,” JHEP 0912, 050 (2009)
arXiv:0910.1586 [hep-th].
[5] D. R. Morrison, V. Kumar and W. Taylor, “Mapping 6D N = 1 supergravity to F-theory,”
arXiv:0911.3393 [hep-th].
[6] H. Nishino and E. Sezgin, “Matter And Gauge Couplings Of N=2 Supergravity In
Six-Dimensions,” Phys. Lett. B 144, 187 (1984).
H. Nishino and E. Sezgin, “The Complete N=2, D = 6 Supergravity With Matter And
Yang-Mills Couplings,” Nucl. Phys. B 278, 353 (1986).
[7] L. J. Romans, “Selfduality For Interacting Fields: Covariant Field Equations For
Six-Dimensional Chiral Supergravities,” Nucl. Phys. B 276, 71 (1986).
[8] D. S. Park and W. Taylor, to appear
[9] A. Sagnotti, “A Note on the Green-Schwarz mechanism in open string theories,” Phys. Lett.
B 294, 196 (1992) arXiv:hep-th/9210127.
[10] V. Sadov, “Generalized Green-Schwarz mechanism in F theory,” Phys. Lett. B 388, 45
(1996) arXiv:hep-th/9606008.
[11] C. W. Bernard, N. H. Christ, A. H. Guth and E. J. Weinberg, “Pseudoparticle parameters
for arbitrary gauge groups,” Phys. Rev. D 16, 2967 (1977).
– 37 –

[PDF PAGE 39]
[12] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and E. Witten, “Superstring Theory. Vol. 2: Loop Amplitudes,
Anomalies And Phenomenology,” Cambridge, Uk: Univ. Pr. ( 1987) 596 P. ( Cambridge
Monographs On Mathematical Physics)
[13] J. Erler, “Anomaly Cancellation In Six-Dimensions,” J. Math. Phys. 35, 1819 (1994)
arXiv:hep-th/9304104.
[14] E. Witten, “Five-brane eﬀective action in M-theory,” J. Geom. Phys. 22, 103 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-th/9610234].
[15] D. Belov and G. W. Moore, “Holographic action for the self-dual ﬁeld,”
arXiv:hep-th/0605038.
[16] A. Salam and E. Sezgin, “Anomaly Freedom In Chiral Supergravities,” Phys. Scripta 32, 283
(1985).
E. Bergshoeﬀ, T. W. Kephart, A. Salam and E. Sezgin, “Global Anomalies In
Six-Dimensions,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 1, 267 (1986).
S. V. Ketov, “Cancellation Of Gravitational Anomalies In D = 6 Supergravities,” Sov. Phys.
J. 32, 801 (1989).
S. V. Ketov, “Anomalies Of Kaluza-Klein Theories In Six-Dimensions,” Class. Quant. Grav.
7, 1387 (1990).
[17] M. Hamermesh, “Group Theory and its Application to Physical Problems,” Addison Wesley
Publ. Co. Reading (1962).
[18] E. Witten, “An SU(2) anomaly,” Phys. Lett. B 117, 324 (1982).
[19] M. Bershadsky and C. Vafa, “Global anomalies and geometric engineering of critical theories
in six dimensions,” arXiv:hep-th/9703167.
[20] R. Suzuki and Y. Tachikawa, “More anomaly-free models of six-dimensional gauged
supergravity,” J. Math. Phys. 47, 062302 (2006) arXiv:hep-th/0512019.
[21] M. J. Duﬀ, S. Ferrara, R. R. Khuri and J. Rahmfeld, “Supersymmetry and dual string
solitons,” Phys. Lett. B 356, 479 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9506057].
[22] M. J. Duﬀ, H. Lu and C. N. Pope, “Heterotic phase transitions and singularities of the gauge
dyonic string,” Phys. Lett. B 378, 101 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9603037].
[23] S. Deser, A. Gomberoﬀ, M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, “p-brane dyons and
electric-magnetic duality,” Nucl. Phys. B 520, 179 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9712189].
[24] P. Tur´an . “On an extremal problem in graph theory,” Matematikai ´es Fizikai Lapok 48:
436-452 (1941).
[25] J. H. Schwarz, “Anomaly-Free Supersymmetric Models in Six Dimensions,” Phys. Lett. B
371, 223 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9512053.
[26] F. Denef, “Les Houches Lectures on Constructing String Vacua,” arXiv:0803.1194 [hep-th].
[27] C. Vafa, “Evidence for F-Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 469, 403 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9602022.
[28] D. R. Morrison and C. Vafa, “Compactiﬁcations of F-Theory on Calabi–Yau Threefolds – I,”
Nucl. Phys. B 473, 74 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9602114.
D. R. Morrison and C. Vafa, “Compactiﬁcations of F-Theory on Calabi–Yau Threefolds –
II,” Nucl. Phys. B 476, 437 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9603161.
– 38 –

[PDF PAGE 40]
[29] A. Grassi, D. R. Morrison, “Group representations and the Euler characteristic of elliptically
ﬁbered Calabi-Yau threefolds”, J. Algebraic Geom. 12 (2003), 321-356 arXiv:math/0005196.
[30] A. Grassi, D. R. Morrison, “Anomalies and the Euler characteristic of elliptically ﬁbered
Calabi-Yau threefolds,” to appear.
[31] W. Barth, C. Peters, and A. Van de Ven, “Compact complex surfaces”, Springer-Verlag, 1984.
[32] J. Milnor, “On simply connected 4-manifolds,” Symposium internacional de topolog´ıa
algebraica, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico and UNESCO, Mexico City, 1958,
pp. 122–128.
[33] A. Adams, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dubovsky, A. Nicolis and R. Rattazzi, “Causality,
analyticity and an IR obstruction to UV completion,” JHEP 0610, 014 (2006)
arXiv:hep-th/0602178.
[34] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Comments on String Dynamics in Six Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys.
B 471, 121 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9603003.
[35] S. Kleiman, “Toward a numerical theory of ampleness,” Ann. of Math. (2) 84 (1966) 293–344.
[36] S. Mori, “Threefolds whose canonical bundles are not numerically eﬀective,” Ann. of Math.
(2) 116 (1982) 133–176.
[37] M. Bershadsky, K. A. Intriligator, S. Kachru, D. R. Morrison, V. Sadov and C. Vafa,
“Geometric singularities and enhanced gauge symmetries,” Nucl. Phys. B 481, 215 (1996)
arXiv:hep-th/9605200.
[38] C. Vafa, “The string landscape and the swampland,” arXiv:hep-th/0509212.
N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis and C. Vafa, “The string landscape, black holes and
gravity as the weakest force,” JHEP 0706, 060 (2007) arXiv:hep-th/0601001.
H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “On the geometry of the string landscape and the swampland,” Nucl.
Phys. B 766, 21 (2007) arXiv:hep-th/0605264.
[39] V. Kumar and W. Taylor, “Freedom and Constraints in the K3 Landscape,” JHEP 0905,
066 (2009) arXiv:0903.0386 [hep-th].
[40] J. Polchinski, “String theory. Vol. 2: Superstring theory and beyond,” Cambridge, UK: Univ.
Pr. (1998) 531 p
[41] E. Witten, “Phase transitions in M-theory and F-theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 471 (1996)
195–216, arXiv:hep-th/9603150.
[42] D. R. Morrison and N. Seiberg, “Extremal transitions and ﬁve-dimensional supersymmetric
ﬁeld theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 483 (1997) 229–247, arXiv:hep-th/9609070.
[43] A. Dabholkar and J. Park, “An Orientifold of Type-IIB Theory on K3,” Nucl. Phys. B 472,
207 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9602030.
A. Dabholkar and J. Park, “Strings on Orientifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 477, 701 (1996)
arXiv:hep-th/9604178.
[44] W. Nahm, “Supersymmetries and their representations,” Nucl. Phys. B 135, 149 (1978).
[45] A. Adams, O. de Wolfe and W. Taylor, “String universality in ten dimensionalities,”
arXiv:1006.1352 [hep-th].
– 39 –

[PDF PAGE 41]
[46] C. Angelantonj, M. Bianchi, G. Pradisi, A. Sagnotti and Y. S. Stanev, “Comments on
Gepner models and type I vacua in string theory,” Phys. Lett. B 387, 743 (1996)
arXiv:hep-th/9607229.
[47] K. Schellekens, private communication
[48] E. G. Gimon and J. Polchinski, “Consistency Conditions for Orientifolds and D-Manifolds,”
Phys. Rev. D 54, 1667 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9601038;
E. G. Gimon and C. V. Johnson, “K3 Orientifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 477, 715 (1996)
arXiv:hep-th/9604129.
[49] R. Blumenhagen, V. Braun, B. Kors and D. Lust, “Orientifolds of K3 and Calabi-Yau
manifolds with intersecting D-branes,” JHEP 0207, 026 (2002) arXiv:hep-th/0206038.
[50] S. Nagaoka and W. Taylor, to appear
[51] S. Hellerman, J. McGreevy and B. Williams, “Geometric Constructions of Nongeometric
String Theories,” JHEP 0401, 024 (2004) arXiv:hep-th/0208174.
[52] S. Randjbar-Daemi, A. Salam, E. Sezgin and J. A. Strathdee, “An Anomaly Free Model In
Six-Dimensions,” Phys. Lett. B 151, 351 (1985);
S. D. Avramis, A. Kehagias and S. Randjbar-Daemi, “A new anomaly-free gauged
supergravity in six dimensions,” JHEP 0505, 057 (2005) arXiv:hep-th/0504033;
[53] M. J. Duﬀ, R. Minasian and E. Witten, “Evidence for Heterotic/Heterotic Duality,” Nucl.
Phys. B 465, 413 (1996) arXiv:hep-th/9601036.
[54] M. Reid, “The moduli space of 3-folds with K = 0 may nevertheless be irreducible,” Math.
Ann. 278 (1987) 329–334.
– 40 –
